February 2025
A Roadmap for Digital Health
Transformation in Mauritius
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) works with the Mauritius Ministry of Health and Wellness
on digital transformation of the national health sector. This case study was developed by the UNDP Digital Health
for Development Hub in partnership with the Mauritius Country Office to promote exchange of knowledge and
South-South collaboration on digital health. The case study provides valuable insights and learnings, serving as a
resource to guide other UNDP country teams for working on national digital health initiatives.
 Early experiences shape government spending on health care has increased by
over 70 percent from MUR 9.2 billion in 2014 to MUR 15.7
digital health transformation
billion in fiscal year 2023–2024.3
in Mauritius
COVID-19 digital experience
The Republic of Mauritius has a population of Like other countries around the globe, in 2020 the
1,260,767 people and consists of the main island of Republic of Mauritius was hit by the COVID-19 pandemic,
Mauritius and two other islands, Rodrigues and Agalega.1 which strained health resources and had significant
Guided by the Health Sector Strategic Plan (2020– economic impacts.4 Building on existing relationships,
2024), the Ministry of Health and Wellness oversees the UNDP Mauritius partnered with the Ministry of Health
country’s strong health system, which offers free universal and Wellness to support an inclusive, multisectoral
access to health care services to every citizen.2 An response to COVID-19 which included recovery efforts
estimated 73 percent of health care services are provided to address the socio-economic impacts of the pandemic.
through a network of 157 public health facilities, including When COVID-19 arrived in the country, the health system
regional hospitals, district and community hospitals, consisted mostly of paper-based processes with some
mediclinics, area and community health centers and fragmented digital systems, which proved challenging for
specialized hospitals that are well distributed across the access to real-time data for delivery of health services
islands; the remaining care is delivered by private sector and rapid decision-making. There was a critical need for
providers. The health system is supported by a public a laboratory information system to expedite the ordering
health workforce of 14,000 staff that includes doctors, of COVID tests and share test results. To address this
nurses, dentists, pharmacists and other health workers, gap, UNDP Mauritius contracted with the University of
of which 55 percent are women. Over the last nine years, Washington to implement OpenELIS, an open-source

solution, and provided the information technology (IT)  Enhance the accessibility and quality of health
equipment and on-the-ground technical support needed care services.
for configuration, implementation and adoption of the  Enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of health
laboratory information system.5 Use of OpenELIS proved care services.
effective in supporting COVID-19 response activities.
 Optimize administrative processes to improve overall
OpenELIS was later enhanced to support the All-In-One
healthcare system efficiency.
Travel Form border control processes which required
 Establish a robust IT-enabled management and
all passengers landing in the country to obtain COVID
screening (restrictions have since been lifted).6 Today, the monitoring system.
OpenELIS system is being scaled up to support laboratory  Improve data management and information-sharing
orders and test results for other diseases. among healthcare professionals.
 Establish a secure and interoperable electronic health
For the Ministry of Health and Wellness, the COVID-19 records (EHR) system (One Patient, One Record).
pandemic underscored the urgency of health system
 Facilitate real-time monitoring and reporting for public
resilience to withstand future outbreaks and shocks. The
health initiatives.
valuable experience gained through implementation and
use of the laboratory information system demonstrated the
Working alongside the Ministry, UNDP Mauritius helped
efficiencies of digital solutions and prepared stakeholders
stakeholders develop a roadmap that consisted of
to embark on a digitization journey. Motivated by these
a phased approach to the initiative and addressed
experiences, as well as a desire to continually enhance
key aspects of the underlying enabling environment,
the delivery of health care services and improve health
including, policy, strategy, governance, human resources
outcomes, the Ministry of Health and Wellness requested
and a national digital health architecture.
UNDP Mauritius technical expertise for undertaking digital
transformation across the health system.
“The eHealth project was not just
about digitizing a system, it also meant
Roadmap to digital transformation
business process re-engineering, site
UNDP Mauritius, the Ministry of Health and Wellness
assessments, having the right legislation
and other stakeholders initially collaborated to develop
a vision and theory of change to replace paper-based and ensuring health officials have the
processes with a modern and integrated eHealth system right technical knowledge to adopt and
to improve the quality of care services in public regional
use the IT system. Equally important is to
hospitals and healthcare centers.
ensure that the population at large can
easily access the system.”
“To capitalize on Information and
Communication Technologies to create – Vichittra Purdassee, Digital Transformation
an interoperable national digital health Project Manager, UNDP Mauritius and
Seychelles
architecture and associated standards
that help drive decisions for investment
UNDP Mauritius provided technical expertise to support
for digital health system components
planning and implementation activities, including project
to ensure continuity of care through management, change management (communications,
affordable, high-quality, user-centric training and capacity-building), knowledge management,
business process/workflow redesign, system design
services to all health care stakeholders
and implementation, reporting and analytics, and endin Mauritius.”
user engagement.
– Republic of Mauritius, Vision for Digital
Health Transformation
To inform country plans, stakeholders embarked on a
study tour to Rwanda in 2022 to learn from Rwanda’s
experiences, challenges and promising approaches.
Emerging from these initial activities, the following
objectives were identified for the Mauritius Digital Health
Systems Strengthening initiative:

 Creating enabling policies, Health and Wellness mentions technology in the following
statement: “Harness the full potential of ICT to empower
governance and strategic
people to live healthy lives.” Building on this, strategic
plans goal 18 of the Health Sector Strategic Plan (2020–2024)
calls for the generation of sound and reliable information
To approach digital transformation holistically, at all levels of the health system in a holistic approach for
stakeholders outlined plans to develop enabling polices better decision-making through the implementation of
and a governance structure, and to align strategic priorities the eHealth project.13 In addition, the Digital Government
to affirm government commitment and leadership. Transformation Strategy 2018–2022 outlined plans
to optimize, transform and create better government
Policies services, including health care, through digitization.14
Collectively these strategic documents provide a
In recent years, the Republic of Mauritius has passed
foundation and a common vision for digital investments
legislation on data protection, cybersecurity and
in the health system and facilitate country ownership and
cybercrime, and electronic transactions, the Information
management of the journey.
and Communications Technologies Act and the Mauritius
Emerging Technologies Council Act.7,8,9,10,11 Despite these
legislative actions, the Ministry of Health and Wellness 
Planning for One Patient,
does not currently have provisions that adequately
address the use of EHRs, data-sharing and more. To close One Record
these gaps, the country is developing comprehensive
digital health legislation to regulate data protection, Central to the Mauritius Digital Health Systems
access to health data, and build advanced capacity Strengthening initiative is the One Patient, One Record
to develop and responsibly use Artificial Intelligence. project, which includes shifting from paper-based
Under the project, legal experts will support the review processes at health facilities to making use of a patient
and assessment of a legal framework for digital health, portal and patient administration system (PAS) (inclusive
draft a policy paper based on the country context and of EHR capabilities) and a few other baseline modules
develop the bill (if required) at the direction of the Ministry enabling health care workers to access health information
of Health and Wellness and other stakeholders. needed to coordinate care and deliver services. The
project has been allocated a budget of MUR 600 million
Governance and staffing and divided into several phases.15
The Mauritius Digital Health Systems Strengthening
“The launch of the eHealth project in
initiative was initially coordinated through a planning
working group led by the Ministry of Health and Wellness. Mauritius transcends being a mere
It is now in the process of transitioning into a formal milestone; it signifies a giant leap
governance structure with committees for technical areas.
towards a healthier, more connected
Multisectoral stakeholders participating in governance
future for our nation. Let’s embrace this
and coordination activities include the Ministry of Health
technological evolution with open arms,
and Wellness, the Ministry of Information Technology,
Communications and Innovation, the Ministry of Finance, confident that we are paving the way
Economic Development and Planning, and UNDP for a healthcare system that is not only
Mauritius. Through the new governance structure, these
efficient but also compassionate and
stakeholders will continue to drive digital transformation
patient-centric.”
efforts by shaping plans, directing investments and
establishing priorities. – Amanda Serumaga, Resident Representative,
UNDP Mauritius and Seychelles
Working with Mauritius, the Ministry of Health and
Wellness has developed plans for a Digital Health UNDP Mauritius worked with the Ministry of Health
Agency, approved by Cabinet on 24 August 2024.12 and Wellness and partners in identifying requirements
UNDP Mauritius has also recruited a team to work on the and engaging in a procurement process to select a
Mauritius Digital Health Systems Strengthening initiative technology partner, TrioTree Technologies Pvt. Ltd., and its
and managed complex procurement processes to bring consortium of partners, namely Informatics International
in additional technical consultants to fill specific skills Ltd. and Netcom Partners Ltd. Once on board, TrioTree
gaps, as well as technology partners to support system and partners conducted a readiness assessment at
design, configuration and implementation. However, the public health facilities. The assessment gathered
recruitment of technical experts was challenging due to information to better understand the eHealth maturity at
the lack of technical resources in the market. facilities, including IT gaps (hardware, software, electrical
infrastructure) to inform infrastructure needs and staff
Strategic plans skills. The readiness assessment found that most clinical
data were being captured in an unstructured format in
While Mauritius has no specific digital health strategy,
hundreds of paper forms, journals, books and letters and
other strategic documents set a precedent and provide
would need to be re-engineered into the PAS system.
the necessary guidance and commitment for investments
in digital health. The mission statement of the Ministry of

To develop the change management plans, TrioTree Under Phase 2, the following additional eHealth modules
will consider findings from the readiness assessment are planned:
and conduct a deeper stakeholder analysis to evaluate
 Radiology (including a picture archiving and
influence, interests and potential resistance to change.
communication system – PACS)
UNDP Mauritius has requested TrioTree to then develop a
 Laboratory (integration with existing and new
clear vision and set of objectives for change management,
laboratory services)
communication plans, training and education plans,
leadership engagement and identification of champions,  Nursing module (collection of vitals, among others)
empowerment activities, and mechanisms for feedback  Pharmacy (including inventory)
and continuous improvement.
 Public health and primary care support services
 Non-communicable diseases services
The One Patient, One Record project is broken down into
two major phases to iteratively configure the PAS system  Bed and ward management
modules and functionalities to country needs, support  Surgical (operating theatre)
training and engage in a national roll-out.
 Intensive care
 Clinical practice management (including dental
Under Phase 1, the following core modules of the PAS
services, paramedical services, etc.)
system are planned:
 Billing and costing.
 PAS system (including national patient register, medical
file tracking and electronic queue management) Once fully implemented and scaled, the One Patient, One
 Patient portal (including a patient app) Record system will enable all citizens of Mauritius to have
one longitudinal health record that is accessible in real-
 Blood bank implementation at blood transfusion
time to health workers to coordinate care, deliver services
services (including a donor app)
and improve health and wellness. It will also provide a
 Query and reporting (analytics).
patient portal to empower citizens to be actively engaged
in making informed decisions about their health care
The Phase 1 PAS system and functionalities will be tested at
and treatment.
the Jawaharlal Nehru Regional Hospital and subsequently
extended to other regional hospitals, health centers,
community centers and mediclinics. At the conclusion
of Phase 1 and following operational acceptance, UNDP
Mauritius plans to hand over ownership and management
of the project to the Ministry of Health and Wellness to
manage the next steps.
Figure 1. Mauritius PAS system and modules
Reporting & Analytics Interoperability
(Dashboards) (HL7Tree, ConnecTree)
• Blood Bank Equipment integration
• OpeneLIS Global (LIS Application)
• DHIS2
• Maupass
Mobility
Electronic
Blood Donors App
Medical Record
Patient Portal App
(EMR)
Including Specialty Specific EMR such as
Ophthalmology, Dentistry etc.
 OPD Management  Inpatient  Nursing  Pharmacy  Practice  Lab Information
(OPD) Management Management Management Management System
 Radiology  Accident &  Operating Theatre Management  Surgical  PACS
Information System Emergency (AED) Management (OTM)  Inventory  Billing & Costing  Bed & Ward
(RIS)  Blood Bank  Intensive Care Unit Management Management
 ICU Management  Medical File Tracking
National Electronic Health Record (NEHR)
Roles-Based Multi-Facility Audit Trail Customizable In Built Workflow Scalable Master Patient
Authorization Support Digital Forms CDSS Driven & Secure Index (MPI)

 A blueprint for a national the initiative and realize their vision. UNDP country
teams can assist governments in thinking through
digital health architecture
their needs, priorities and staffing to strengthen their
leadership in digital health.
To prevent fragmentation and promote interoperability
 Assess readiness: Early in the planning stage for the
of data and digital solutions across the health system,
One Patient, One Record project, it was apparent
the Republic of Mauritius is developing a Digital Health
that there were varied levels of readiness in terms
Blueprint. The Blueprint is intended to outline a national
of health facility infrastructure and workforce skills.
digital health architecture that aligns business processes,
UNDP Mauritius required a readiness assessment
provides a platform with shared services (e.g. health
to be conducted as a first step to better understand
facility registry, provider directory, master patient index),
the gaps and needs, and then outlined clear plans
connects digital applications, details standards and
to address them. Understanding readiness is an
implementation guidance, and scales data exchange.16
important early step in planning that helps shape
the subsequent activities and select appropriate
To support this process, UNDP Mauritius has hired
resources and technologies to set countries on a
technical experts to conduct a technical review,
path to success.
facilitate stakeholder engagement and consultations,
develop guiding principles, design the blueprint and  Invest in the enabling environment: UNDP Mauritius
interoperability plans, assess capacity and technical technical guidance proposed a robust planning
assistance needs, and develop an implementation process that considered not just technology needs but
plan and other supporting materials. The Digital Health also staffing, governance, strategy, policy and more
Blueprint will consider business objectives, current and in an integrated approach. The planning process led
future digital health applications, definition of concepts, to a holistic approach that is setting up the Mauritius
and data and exchange standards. When implemented, Digital Health Systems Strengthening initiative for
the national digital health architecture – the PAS under long-term success. To ensure sustainability of digital
the One Patient, One Record project – becomes the health investments, it is essential for UNDP country
baseline for scaling up the other IT systems supporting teams to assess the broader enabling environment
health programmes. and identify gaps or challenges that need to be
addressed to successfully implement, sustain and
effectively use interoperable digital health systems.
 Key learnings  Support country procurement processes: The UNDP
Mauritius team experienced lengthy procurement
Through a step-by-step and iterative approach that procedures and administrative hurdles in selecting
considers not just the technology but other components technical solutions and onboarding technology
needed to implement, sustain and effectively use partners. UNDP Mauritius worked closely with
interoperable digital health systems, UNDP Mauritius government leaders to navigate procurement
and the Ministry of Health and Wellness have already challenges and invested time in due diligence
overcome numerous challenges and gained experience activities. Despite experiencing challenging
that is shaping their next steps. procurement processes, UNDP country teams can
provide the support needed to help mitigate them
Key learnings include: and ensure the right resources and solutions are
identified and purchased to meet country needs.
 Build strong partnerships: UNDP Mauritius worked
 Navigate complex implementation: The Mauritius
alongside the Ministry of Health and Wellness and
Digital Health Systems Strengthening portfolio
engaged in partnership-building activities with other
presents complex implementation challenges due
stakeholders throughout the planning process and
to the concurrent execution of multiple initiatives,
continues to do so. Throughout the Mauritius Digital
including the laboratory information system, readiness
Health Systems Strengthening initiative, many
assessments, human resources management and the
stakeholders were engaged in governance meetings
One Patient, One Record system. To navigate this
and processes representing varied perspectives and
complexity, it has been imperative for UNDP Mauritius
priorities. The UNDP Mauritius team supported robust
to establish a cohesive and collaborative working
engagement with all these stakeholders to gain buy-in
relationship among all stakeholders, with staff
and alignment to move forward with shared plans.
dedicated to project implementation. This approach
Governance and coordination with key stakeholders
ensures effective task management, synchronization
are ongoing activities that are essential to ensure
and dependency resolution, enabling seamless
buy-in and alignment and develop shared plans.
coordination across interdependent activities.
 Promote government leadership and capacity:
Through the Mauritius Digital Health Systems
Strengthening initiative, the Ministry of Health and
Wellness is not only a key stakeholder but has led and
directed plans based on country needs and priorities.
UNDP Mauritius works side by side with government
leaders to build their internal capacity and consider
the internal staff and expertise needed to support

 Future plans UNDP Mauritius continues to support the Republic of
Mauritius on its digital health transformation journey
through collaboration, technical support and investments
“We are impacting the life of every
in the digital health enabling environment, including digital
citizen with this digital health
health solutions, policy, strategy, governance, human
transformation. For years Mauritius has resources and a national digital health architecture.
been trying to transition from a paper- Through these activities, the country is building a
based health system to digital, and this more resilient health system and ensuring continuous
improvement in the
is the moment. This will impact the life of
delivery of high-quality,
every citizen, giving access their health
coordinated, user-centric
information anytime. That’s a big step in health services to improve
the journey of transformation.” health outcomes.
– Renooka Beejan, Head of Socio-Economic
Development Unit, UNDP Mauritius and
Seychelles
1 Statistics Mauritius, ‘Tableau de Bord’, Government of Mauritius, 2023, https://statsmauritius.govmu.org/Pages/Statistics/Tableau-de-Bord.aspx.
2 Ministry of Health and Wellness, ‘Health Sector Strategic Plan 2020–2024’, Government of Mauritius, Port Louis, 2019, https://health.govmu.org/health/
wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Health-Sector-Strategic-Plan-2020-2024.pdf.
3 United Nations Development Programme , ‘Overview of Mauritius Health Sector and eHealth FV’, UNDP, 2 May 2024.
4 United Nations Development Programme, ‘Socio-Economic Impact Assessment of COVID-19 in Mauritius’, UNDP, Port Louis, 2 March 2021, https://www.undp.
org/africa/publications/socio-economic-impact-assessment-covid-19-mauritius.
5 See https://openelis-global.org/.
6 See https://safemauritius.govmu.org/.
7 Government of Mauritius, ‘Data Protection Act 2017’, Government of Mauritius, 2017, https://dataprotection.govmu.org/Pages/The%20Law/Data-ProtectionAct-2017.aspx.
8 Government of Mauritius, The Cybersecurity and Cybercrime Act 2021, Act No. 16 of 2021, Legal Supplement to the Government Gazette of Mauritius, No.
173, 24 November 2021, https://ncb.govmu.org/ncb/legislations/THE%20CYBERSECURITY%20AND%20CYBERCRIME%20ACT%202021.pdf.
9 Government of Mauritius, ‘The Electronic Transactions Act 2000, Act 23/2000’, Government of Mauritius, Port Louis, 2000, https://www.icta.mu/
documents/2021/08/eta.pdf.
10 Government of Mauritius, ‘Information and Communication Technologies Act 2001, Act 44/2001’, Government of Mauritius, Port Louis, 2022, https://www.
icta.mu/documents/2022/04/ict_act.pdf.
11 Government of Mauritius, ‘The Mauritius Emerging Technologies Council Act 2021, Act No. 10 of 2021’, Government of Mauritius, Port Louis, 2021, https://
mitci.govmu.org/Documents/Legislations/Mauritius%20Emerging%20Technologies%20Council%20Act%202021.pdf.
12 Defimedia, ‘eHealth : une Digital Health Agency verra le jour’, Defimedia, 16 August 2024, https://defimedia.info/ehealth-une-digital-health-agency-verra-le-jour.
13 Ministry of Health and Wellness, ‘Health Sector Strategic Plan 2020–2024’, Government of Mauritius, Port Louis, 2019, https://health.govmu.org/health/
wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Health-Sector-Strategic-Plan-2020-2024.pdf.
14 Central Informatics Bureau, Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation, ‘Digital Government Transformation Strategy 2018–2022’, Government
of Mauritius, Port Louis, 2017, https://ncb.govmu.org/ncb/strategicplans/DigitalGovernmentTransformation.pdf.
15 United Nations Development Programme, ‘UNDP supports the launch of the “One Patient, One Record” eHealth Project for Enhanced Public Healthcare’, UNDP, 29
January 2024, https://www.undp.org/mauritius-seychelles/news/undp-supports-launch-one-patient-one-record-ehealth-project-enhanced-public-healthcare.
16 World Health Organization, ‘Digital Implementation Investment Guide (DIIG): Integrating Digital Interventions into Health Programmes’, WHO, Geneva, 2020,
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240010567.
UNDP’s work on digital health for development contributes to the Pact for the Future and accelerating progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals and the pledge to leave no one in behind. The UNDP Digital Health for Development Hub is a one-stop shop
with technical, advisory and partnership support for the introduction and scale up of digital and AI for health as part of its HIV and
Health Strategy 2022-25. UNDP is working across 89 countries to identify, adapt and scale up appropriate digital and AI solutions
that strengthen health systems and improve health outcomes. The Hub focuses on strengthening policies, capacities and institutions
in line with the UN Global Digital Compact and WHO guidance. The Hub also supports knowledge and learning on digital health
for development and AI for health across its network of Country Offices, regional hubs and global teams.
Get in touch
If you’re interested in knowing more, or to partner with us, please contact us at:
Amanda Serumaga, UNDP Resident Representative for the Mauritius Manish Pant, Policy Specialist Digital Health, HIV and Health Group,
and Seychelles Country Office, amanda.serumaga@undp.org Bureau for Policy & Programme Support (BPPS), manish.pant@undp.org
Renooka Beejan, Head of Socio-Economic Development Unit, UNDP Ketki Bhatia, Program Analyst Digital Health, HIV and Health Group,
Mauritius and Seychelles, renooka.beejan@undp.org Bureau for Policy & Programme Support (BPPS), ketki.bhatia@undp.org
ketki.bhatia@undp.org
@UNDPHIVHealth