REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
Ministry of Health & Social Services
NAtIONAL eHEALtH
StRAtEgy 2021-2025
A healthy nation enjoying a high standard of
living and quality health and social welfare
services enabled by eHealth.

Ministry of Health & Social Services
National eHealth Strategy
2021 – 2025
Directorate of Health Information and Research
Information Technology Management Division
Private Bag 13198, Windhoek
+264 61 203 9111
www.mhss.gov.na
December 2020

Foreword
The Ministry of Health and Social Services has the mandate to fulfil one of the aspirations in
Namibia’s Vision 2030 to “transform Namibia into a healthy and food-secure nation”. Namibia
strives to provide quality health and social welfare services efficiently and effectively to the
population across the country in its quest to achieve universal health coverage. Namibia has
identified eHealth as one of its key enablers to achieve universal health coverage.
eHealth is one of the key initiatives in the eGovernment Strategy and is referenced in a number of strategic documents. Indeed, the Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5) highlights
eHealth as one of the strategies to achieve the desired outcome that “all Namibians will have
access to quality health care by 2022”. NDP5 also specifically refers to the synchronisation of
the fragmented health systems within the Ministry. Furthermore, the Harambee Prosperity Plan
places emphasis on eHealth as one of the means to achieve social progression pillar targets.
The plan stipulates that during the Harambee period all health facilities will be electrified and
broadband internet connections will be rolled out to 70 percent of health facilities to allow
eHealth implementation by 2020. The national aspirations and priorities are in-line with the
May 2018 Seventy-First World Health Assembly (WHA) Resolution WHA71.7 that promote
Digital health or Health Digitalisation to improve health and well-being for people of all ages,
everywhere, toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SGDs).
eHealth utilizes and harnesses the power of Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
to provide quality healthcare and social welfare services. The provision of quality health and
social welfare services is underpinned by timely, accessible and accurate data to inform decision-making for targeted interventions. Rapid advances in ICT make it possible to keep the
finger on the pulse using real-time data to enable among others resource allocation, forecasting,
ensuring health security by strengthening disease monitoring and surveillance. It makes health
information accessible and available to health workers, patients, clients and stakeholders anywhere and anytime. Namibia is privileged to have high mobile broadband coverage and device
penetration; therefore, eHealth enables the same quality of care in urban and rural areas.
I am honoured to present this National eHealth Strategy (2021-2025) that will form the basis for
the implementation of eHealth across the country. This Strategy resulted from a comprehensive
and consultative process with stakeholders and partners supported by the World Health Organisation (WHO). This Strategy serves as guide and coordination mechanism for the implementation of the eHealth activities within the Ministry of Health and Social Services. The Strategy
revolves around seven strategic pillars that focus on leadership and governance; strategy and
investment; services and applications; standards and interoperability; infrastructure; legislation, policy and compliance; and workforce. It contains detailed implementation, monitoring
and evaluation and costed plans.
Finally, I sincerely believe that eHealth signifies a transformation that can drive productivity
whilst enabling us to deliver quality care and services in an efficient and effective manner. This
eHealth Strategy therefore came at a time when the country needs eHealth the most.
i

Preface
This National eHealth Strategy (2021 – 2025) is the response to a national vision of a healthy
nation enjoying a high standard of living and quality health and social services enabled by
eHealth. It is envisioned that this eHealth Strategy will provide a guide for how Information
Communication Technologies (ICTs) will contribute to Namibia’s health systems
transformation agenda, which is envisioned through a strategy of strengthening health service
delivery through utilization of electronic solutions that are adaptive to the priority needs of
Namibia.
Various stakeholders and technical teams contributed to the development of this eHealth
strategy. The MoHSS acknowledges the collaborative work of numerous individuals and
organisations and the specific leadership and guidance provided by the Directorate of Health
Information and Research and our partner, the World Health Organisation (WHO).
Appreciation goes to the many individuals who contributed to this process, including Ms
Philomena Ochurus, Director of Health Information and Research Directorate, who together
with Deputy Director, Mr Joseph Mudjuu and his team, coordinated the development of this
strategy.
Special acknowledgement also goes to Dr Charles Sagoe-Moses, WHO Representative in
Namibia, Dr Mary Brantuo of WHO Namibia, Dr Hillary Kipruto and Derrick Muneene from
WHO AFRO, and WHO consultants Dr Sean Broomhead and Prof Anicia Peters for the
provision of technical support in the development of the strategy document.
The Ministry conveys its sincere appreciation to all our stakeholders, in particular the US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Namibia, the University of Namibia
(UNAM), Namibia University of Science and Technology (NUST) and United States Agency
for International Development (USAID) who contributed to development and finalization of
this significant document. All Government Ministries, Agencies and Offices and our partners
in the health sector are herewith urged to embrace this eHealth strategic plan and support its
implementation as we endeavour to leverage the use of technology towards the achievement
of universal health coverage for the Namibia population.
_____________________
Ben Nangombe
Executive Director: Ministry of Health and Social Services
ii

List of Abbreviations and Acronyms
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
AI Artificial Intelligence
ART Antiretroviral Therapy
BYOD Bring Your Own Device
CBS Case-based Surveillance
CRAN Communications Regulatory Authority of Namibia
DHIS District Health Information System
eHI eHealth Impact
eHIMA eHealth Impact Model for Africa
GRN Government of the Republic of Namibia
HER Electronic Health Record Master Patient Index MPI
EMR Electronic Medical Record
FHIR Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource
FOSS Free and Open Source Software
HIM Health Information Mediator
HIS Health Information System
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HL7 Health Level Seven Internal
HR Human Resources
HRH Human Resources for Health
HRIS Human Resource Information System
ICD-10 International Classification of Diseases 10th revision
ICT Information and Communications Technology
IHCIMS Integrated Health Care Information Management System
IHE Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise
IHSP Integrated Health Service Plan
IMR Infant Mortality Rate
IoT Internet of Things
IT Information Technology
ITU International Telecommunication Union
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MICT Ministry of Information and Communications Technology
MoHSS Ministry of Health and Social Services
iii

MPI Master Patient Index
NCRST Namibia Commission on Research, Science and Technology
NDP National Development Plan
NGO Non-governmental organization
PHC Primary Health Care
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
TB Tuberculosis
UHC Universal Health Coverage
UID Unique Identifier
WHA World Health Assembly
WHO World Health Organization
WHO AFRO World Health Organization Regional Office for Africa
iv

Table of Contents
Foreword i
Preface ii
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms iii
List of Tables vii
List of Figures viii
Executive Summary ix
1. Strategic Context for eHealth 1
1.1 Namibian eHealth Development Context 1
1.1.1 Population Health 1
1.1.2 Health System Status 2
1.1.3 Health Sector Strategic Objectives 3
1.1.4 ICT Environment and Mobile Infrastructure 3
1.2 Global eHealth Context 4
1.3 Approach to Developing the Strategy 5
2. National eHealth Strategic Direction 7
2.1 Vision 7
2.2 Mission 7
2.3 eHealth System Goals and Outcomes 7
2.4 Guiding Principles 7
3. Environmental Scanning 9
3.1 SWOT Analysis 9
3.1.1 Leadership and Governance 9
3.1.2 Strategy and Investment 9
3.1.3 Software Services and Software Applications 10
3.1.4 Standards and Interoperability 10
3.1.5 eHealth Infrastructure 11
3.1.6 Legislation, Policy and Compliance 11
3.1.7 Workforce 12
3.1.8 Emerging Opportunities for the Implementation of the eHealth Strategy 12
3.2 PESTEL Analysis 13
v

4. eHealth Strategy 15
4.1 Strategic Areas of Focus and Objectives 15
4.1.1 Leadership and Governance 15
4.1.2 Strategy and Investment 16
4.1.3 Software Services and Software Applications 17
4.1.4 Standards and Interoperability 18
4.1.5 eHealth Infrastructure 19
4.1.6 Legislation, Policy and Compliance 20
4.1.7 Workforce 20
4.2 Critical Success Factors 21
5. Glossary of Terms 22
Appendix 1: The Strategy in Practice – Current and Future State 24
1. The Case for eHealth and Computerised Patient Care 24
2. The Current State of eHealth 26
3. The Future State of eHealth 28
Appendix 2: Strategy Implementation Plan 31
Appendix 3: Monitoring and Evaluation Framework 46
Appendix 4: Indicative Costing Estimates 62
Appendix 5: Alignment with Global Strategy on Digital Health 2020-2025 75
1. Alignment with Proposed Actions for Member States 75
Appendix 6: Digital Health Lessons From COVID-19 85
1. Digital Health Lessons 86
2. Practical Examples 88
2.1 Developed World 88
2.2 Southern Africa 89
2.3 Personal Comments 90
References 91
vi

List of Tables
Table 1: Guiding principles for eHealth in Namibia ................................................................. 7
Table 2: Leadership and governance SWOT overview ............................................................. 9
Table 3: Strategy and investment SWOT overview .................................................................. 9
Table 4: Software services and software applications SWOT overview ................................. 10
Table 5: Standards and interoperability SWOT overview ....................................................... 10
Table 6: eHealth infrastructure SWOT overview .................................................................... 11
Table 7: Legislation, policy and compliance SWOT overview ............................................... 11
Table 8: Workforce SWOT overview ..................................................................................... 12
Table 9: Leadership and governance objectives and interventions ......................................... 15
Table 10: Strategy and Investment objectives and interventions ............................................ 17
Table 11: Services and applications objectives and interventions .......................................... 17
Table 12: Standards and interoperability objective and interventions .................................... 19
Table 13: Infrastructure strategic objective and interventions ................................................ 19
Table 14: Legislation, policy and compliance objective and interventions ............................ 20
Table 15: Workforce objectives and interventions .................................................................. 20
Table 16: Implementation plan details .................................................................................... 31
Table 17: M&E framework ..................................................................................................... 46
Table 18: eHealth strategy costing estimates (N$) .................................................................. 63
Table 19: Adjustment for 5% inflation per annum (N$) ......................................................... 74
Table 20: Alignment with Strategic Objective 1 of the Global Strategy ................................. 76
Table 21: Alignment with Strategic Objective 2 of the Global Strategy ................................. 77
Table 22: Alignment with Strategic Objective 3 of the Global Strategy ................................. 80
Table 23: Alignment with Strategic Objective 4 of the Global Strategy ................................. 82
Table 24: COVID-19 lessons for Namibia’s National eHealth Strategy ................................. 86
vii

List of Figures
Figure 1: The main parts of the WHO/ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit ........................ 6
Figure 2: PESTEL analysis of the eHealth environment ......................................................... 14
Figure 3: Components of the WHO/ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit .......................... 15
Figure 4: Proposed national eHealth governance structure ..................................................... 16
Figure 5: Digital health platform architecture published by the ITU ...................................... 18
Figure 6: An adapted scenario of eHealth assisting in managing patient care ........................ 26
Figure 7: A simplified view of an EHR system ....................................................................... 29
Figure 8: National eHealth Strategy estimated spending trajectory ........................................ 62
Figure 9: National eHealth Strategy estimated finance required, including separation between
cash outlay and redeployed resources ................................................................... 62
Figure 10: National eHealth Strategy estimated distribution of costs between ICT and
organisational costs ............................................................................................... 63
viii

Executive Summary
This eHealth Strategy provides a guide for how Information Communication Technologies
(ICTs) will contribute to Namibia’s health systems transformation agenda. The strategy
provides a roadmap towards implementing eHealth. The primary goal of the strategy is to
strengthen health service delivery through utilization of electronic solutions that respond to
the priority needs of Namibia.
The Strategy is in line with Vision 2030, the e-Government policy, the Fifth National
Development Plan and the Harambee Prosperity Plan. In line with WHO’s guidance that an
eHealth strategy should be based on national health priorities, available and potential
resources, and the current eHealth environment, several key stakeholders were engaged and
consulted in crafting this strategy.
Namibia’s patient medical records are largely paper-based. There are also a number of
disparate eHealth systems, some of which are either not functional or vertical/programme
based, compromising continuity of care. The cost of healthcare provision is high, exacerbated
by the low population density and vast distances between healthcare service providers. The
Harambee Prosperity Plan provides for all health facilities to be electrified and broadband
connections to be rolled out to 70 percent of health facilities to support eHealth by 2020.
Although the Government targets 95% broadband coverage by 2024, the current situation
reveals that many rural health facilities have no Internet connectivity and very few have
reliable connectivity.
The Ministry of Health and Social Services (MoHSS) had embarked on developing different
types of eHealth applications in the past and therefore some essential foundation elements are
already in place. Furthermore, other ministries have successfully implemented large-scale
systems, such as the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), Ministry of Finance, and Ministry
of Home Affairs, Immigration, Safety and Security. Therefore, strengthening inter-ministerial
coordination is a key priority. Local higher education institutions provide capacity
strengthening through targeted offerings for health workers and ICT workers.
The eHealth system will not merely change the existing manual medical records system to an
electronic one, but also seek to change the way that health-related information is collected,
shared, communicated and analysed to improve decision-making and patient care. It should
allow healthcare workers to capture, access and share patient information in a timely manner
across geographic and health sector boundaries using Information and Communication
Technologies that are fit for purpose in a secure and reliable manner. In this way, the eHealth
system should improve access to quality care for all Namibians.
Guiding principles for eHealth in Namibia are outlined as: Universal Health Coverage
(UHC); user-centric; continuity of care; data security, privacy and confidentiality; nondiscrimination and respect for human rights; adherence to global standards on eHealth
practices; accountability, transparency and accessibility; affordable and sustainable health
services; sustainable partnerships to advance eHealth; and adherence to global standards of
data quality.
Strategic objectives are grouped under seven strategic elements: Leadership and Governance;
Strategy and Investment; Software services and software applications; Standards and
Interoperability; eHealth infrastructure; Legislation, Policy and Compliance; and Workforce.
ix

Appendixes include a strategy implementation plan, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
framework, indicative costing estimates, a report on alignment with the WHO Digital Health
Strategy, and a report on digital health lessons from COVID-19.
Success factors include eHealth being regarded as a transformational tool for healthcare
services; high level commitment; adequate funding for eHealth; a user-centric approach; a
well-defined architecture, continuous capacity building both for the ICT personnel and health
workforce, and a comprehensive change management strategy.
There is opportunity for eHealth to contribute to long-term local economic development and
sustainability through growth of a vibrant local ecosystem of teams and organisations that
provide high quality information systems development, maintenance and support services.
x

1. Strategic Context for eHealth
1.1 Namibian eHealth Development Context
The MoHSS faces increasing demand for services, combined with increasing costs and
shortage of skilled healthcare workers. In line with Vision 2030, the e-Government Policy,
the fifth National Development Plan (NDP5) and the Harambee Prosperity Plan, the Ministry
is implementing an eHealth system in its health facilities to leverage eHealth opportunities to
improve efficiencies and health outputs for the people of Namibia.
The Ministry’s goal is to ensure that there is positive impact from every interaction between a
health system client and a health worker, ensuring that they contribute optimally to health
system performance and healthcare outcomes. This will include ensuring that scarce financial
and human resources are deployed as effectively as possible.
By developing and implementing this strategy, the Ministry seeks a paradigm shift in the way
information is collected, communicated and used across health facilities. This entails moving
away from reliance on manual analogue tools such as paper and human memory, to an
environment where all the people within the health system access and share health
information reliably and securely, in a timely manner, across geographic and health sector
boundaries. Such a system provides efficient and effective patient care services to all health
seekers.
There are a number of opportunities for the eHealth system to be a transformational tool
where the benefits exceed the initial and ongoing investment. The eHealth system can address
the challenges of providing health service spanning the entire country by having healthcare
workers and patients in both urban and rural areas access the patient’s health record anywhere
and anytime. The cost of healthcare service provision can be lowered for both the patient and
the Ministry through the use of the variety of emerging digital health opportunities such as
eHealth, m-Health, telemedicine and social media. eHealth also provides information to both
patients and stakeholders in healthcare services to make informed decisions about the
individual patients’, communities’ and the country’s health. Thus, the nation can become
more informed, healthier and make strides towards achieving UHC.
See further details in Appendix 1: The Strategy in Practice – Current and Future State.
1.1.1 Population Health
Namibia’s Vision 2030 aspires to make Namibia a healthy nation in which all preventable
diseases are managed and in which people enjoy a high standard of living with access to
quality health and other vital services. This is well aligned to the WHO drive for UHC. This
means that all people and communities have access to the promotive, preventive, curative,
rehabilitative and palliative health services they need, of sufficient quality to be effective,
while also ensuring that the use of these services does not expose them to financial hardship.
Namibia is a multilingual nation with English as the official language. The country’s
825,418km2 landmass is divided into 14 political regions.

The data for 2016 shows a population size of 2,480,000 with 51.4% for females. Life
expectancy at birth is 61 years for males at and 66 years for females.i About 36.4% of the
total population is younger than 15 years of age and 41.7% of under 15-year olds live in rural
areas compared to 30.6% in urban areas. More people aged 60 and above reside in rural areas
with 8.3% compared to 4.1% in urban areas. The total literacy rate for the population above
15 years is 88.7% with males at 89.4% and females at 87.9%. The literacy rate for those
between 15-34 years is 93.6% with males at 96.4% and females at 97.1%, and urban areas
96.7% compared to rural areas at 90%.ii
In 2017, the probability of dying under the age of five was 44 per 1000 live births, while the
probability of dying between 15 and 60 years of age per 1000 population was 344 and 253 for
males and females respectively.
HIV, TB and malaria are the major diseases in Namibia. Nevertheless, Namibia achieved a
38% decline in new HIV infections between 2010 and 2018 and a 22% decline in AIDSrelated deaths. HIV expenditure was at USD$283 000 000 in 2017, of which more than twothirds was contributed by the Government of Namibia.iii
In 2016, approximately 92.9% of all households had access to safe water for drinking with
30.1% having access to piped water inside their dwellings and 33.4% with access to piped
water outside their dwellings. Comparing the urban and rural areas, the breakdown is 99.6% /
85% respectively. About 46% of households had no toilet facilities.
The rural population in Namibia remains disadvantaged. It has a higher proportion of people
older than 60 and younger than 15 years old, and a lower percentage of the rural population
with access to safe water and toilet facilities.
1.1.2 Health System Status
The MoHSS provides healthcare through hospitals, clinics and health centres.iv The MoHSS
structure comprises 9 national directorates and 14 regional directorates. The national
directorates are: Primary Health Care Services; Social Welfare Services; Special
Programmes; Finance and Procurement; Health Information and Research; Tertiary Health
Care and Clinical Support Services; Policy and Planning; Health Technology and
Infrastructure Management; General Management and Atomic Energy and Radiation
Protection Authority. MoHSS healthcare provision is complemented by private for-profit
hospitals, health centres, private medical practitioners, religious organisations and traditional
healers.
Due to the sheer land size of Namibia and its low population density, it is expensive to get
services to the people. Therefore, outreach services or mobile clinics serves communities in
remote locations.
Health services in Namibia can generally be tied to three components: primary, district health
services, (secondary) and tertiary health services. The MoHSS has adopted the primary
healthcare approach to delivering health services to Namibians.v
About 43.9% of the population receives medical services from clinics and 28.1% from
hospitals. In rural areas, the most common medical service providers are clinics (54%) and

health centres (15.1%) respectively, while hospitals 33.7% and private doctors (17.8%) are
most common in urban areas.ii
Namibia’s healthcare is largely funded by the Government of Namibia in fulfilment of its
commitment towards achieving UHC as outlined in the National Health Policy Framework
2010–2020. Government revenue, private employers’ contributions, and household
contributions (as prepayment and other out-of-pocket payments) are the major domestic
revenue streams. Donor funding provides an important contribution, especially in combatting
diseases such as HIV, TB and malaria.vi
Currently, patient information is recorded manually on medical passports and various
disparate electronic systems. The electronic systems capture data for various purposes and
systems such as HIV data, TB data, stores and financial data, however this data is often
captured from paper-based records. There is no single view of the patient for all healthcare
providers.
1.1.3 Health Sector Strategic Objectives
The overall outcome of the Health Sector Strategic Objectives is that: “by 2022, all
Namibians will have access to quality health systems where the Health Adjusted Life
Expectancy (HALE) has increased to 67.5 years from 58 years in 2015”.x This will be
achieved through implementing the following health sector strategic objectives:
- Improve effective prevention and management of communicable diseases
- Improve effective prevention and management of noncommunicable diseases
- Improve Maternal and new-born health
- Improve Emergency Services
- Strengthen social welfare through quality health services
- Integrated and functional ICT infrastructure
- Ensure Regulatory framework for health service delivery
- Accelerate Health infrastructure development
- Improve contracting and pharmaceutical supply of medicines
- Enhance organizational performance
- Enhance human capital development and utilization.
1.1.4 ICT Environment and Mobile Infrastructure
Namibia enjoys 95% mobile broadband coverage with mobile cellular subscriptions in 2018
was at 112.70%.vii International Telecommunication Union (ITU) indicators show that in
2017 the percentage of individuals using the internet was at 51%. However, mobile coverage
varies between 4G mostly in the urban areas at 36%, 3G (83%) and 2G in remote areas.viii
Currently, there is a mobile tower expansion project underway with the Ministry of
Information & Communication Technology (MICT) and the Mobile Telecommunications
Company (MTC) called the MTC081Everyone project to achieve 100% population network
coverage.ix Existing 2G connectivity is also upgraded to 3G mobile coverage in remote areas.
In 2016, 79.2% of the population aged 15 years and above owned mobile phones of whom a
higher proportion (88%) were in urban areas and 69.6% in rural areas. Smart phone
ownership was at 39.8% in urban areas versus 11.8% in rural areas while feature phone

ownership was at 12.7% in urban areas and 15.1% in rural areas. Basic phone ownership was
at 58.2% and the majority of 73.1% were in rural areas versus 47.5% in urban areas.
Facebook made up 33% of all internet traffic in 2018 with Instagram at 16% and secure
browsing at 32% (MTC/CRAN). WhatsApp is the most preferred and used instant messaging
service at 98% with all other services making up the remaining 2%.viii
MoHSS has appointed more ICT personnel with the requisite skills for supporting the system
such as analyst programmers and systems administrators. The Ministry has functional
videoconference facilities at the Head Office, Windhoek Central, Katutura, Oshakati, Rundu
and Katima Mulilo hospitals.x
OPM is tasked with providing ICT technical support to all public service entities in terms of
human resources, infrastructure and policies. MICT is responsible for the citizen connectivity
while CRAN is responsible for telecommunications licences and regulations.
There are various ICT policies currently in place but the ones most relevant for eHealth are:
the IT Policy for the Public Service, the Overarching ICT Policy of MICT and the Social
Media Policy for Government. The IT Policy for the Public Service makes provision for a
Ministerial Information Technology Steering Committee to coordinate and oversee all
Government ICT projects, infrastructure and service. The Policy also contains provisions for
security and confidentially, integrity and availability of data. Although this does not cover
privacy provisions explicitly between patient and health worker, a data protection bill is being
drafted while a cyber-crimes bill is awaiting tabling in Parliament.
When one considers mobile broadband subscription at 112.70% compared with fixed
broadband subscriptions at 2.53%, and 51% internet users and affordable prepaid airtime
bundles,vii Namibia has great potential to successfully roll out an eHealth system across the
country. Furthermore, such services can be rolled out via mobile platforms, video
conferencing facilities can enable eLearning and telemedicine, and social media can be used
as health dissemination channel.
1.2 Global eHealth Context
The 71st World Health Assembly (WHA) 2018 recognised the important role that eHealth
plays to advance the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and to support health promotion
and disease prevention in all countries by improving the accessibility, quality and
affordability of health services.xi xii Converting this potential into probable benefits requires a
good strategy and implementation plan.
The National eHealth Strategy aligns with the Seventy-First World Health Assembly (WHA)
Resolution (WHA71.7) on Digital Health adopted by the WHO Member States in May 2018.
It urges Member States: “… to assess their use of digital technologies for health, including in
health information systems at the national and sub-national levels, in order to identify areas
of improvement, and to prioritize, as appropriate, the development, evaluation,
implementation, scale-up and greater utilization of digital technologies, as a means of
promoting equitable, affordable and universal access to health for all, including the special
needs of groups that are vulnerable in the context of digital health”.

In closing the 2018 World Health Assembly, WHO Director General said that everything
WHO did going forward would be evaluated in the light of the “triple billion” targets which
were approved in WHO’s new five-year strategic plan. By 2023 the targets aim to achieve:
- 1 billion more people benefitting from UHC
- 1 billion more people better protected from health emergencies
- 1 billion more people enjoying better health and wellbeing.
As a consequence of implementing this strategy, Namibia will be accelerating its share within
the context of the people of Namibia, the attainment of the WHO Triple Billion agenda using
eHealth.
1.3 Approach to Developing the Strategy
The eHealth strategy is for the people of Namibia. There is therefore an obligation for active
engagement with stakeholders in its development and implementation. Engagement of and
consultations with stakeholders was prioritized in the development of this strategy. The
consultations included:
- Government Agencies
• Office of the Prime Minister (OPM)
• Ministry of Health and Social Services (MoHSS)
• Ministry of Home Affairs, Immigration, Safety and Security (MHAISS)
• Ministry of Information and Communication Technology (MICT)
• Ministry of Defence (MoD)
• Namibia Institute of Public Administration and Management (NIPAM)
• Namibia Institute of Pathology (NIP)
• Namibia Correctional Services (NCS)
- United Nations Agencies
• World Health Organization (WHO)
• United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
• United Nations Populations Fund (UNFPA)
• United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS (UNAIDS)
• United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
- Bilateral/Multilateral organizations
• International Training and Education Centre for Health Namibia (I-TECH)
• United States Agency for International Development Namibia (USAID)
• The USAID Global Health Supply Chain Program Namibia (GHSC)
• University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)
• Centres of Disease Control and Prevention Namibia (CDC)
- Institutions of Higher Education
• Namibia University of Science and Technology (NUST)

• University of Namibia (UNAM).
The framework of engagement was the WHO/ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit, which
served as a guide for the development of this strategy.
Figure 1: The main parts of the WHO/ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit
The Toolkit provides a “comprehensive, practical guide that all governments, their ministries,
departments and agencies can adapt to suit their own circumstances and their own vision and
goals”.xiii The Toolkit starts from the premise that eHealth strategy should be based on
national health priorities, the available and potential resources, and the current eHealth
environment.
A review of key policy documents that prompted the development of the eHealth Strategy
was undertaken. These included the following:
- Vision 2030
- e-Government policy
- NDP5
- Harambee Prosperity Plan
- Principles for Digital Development
- Global Diffusion of eHealth
- Global Observatory for eHealth Services
- WHO/ITU National Digital Health Toolkit
- EHR Manual
- WHO Guideline Recommendations on Digital Interventions for Health System
Strengthening released in April 2019.
The objective of the review was to collect and analyse strategic information that would assist
the development of the eHealth Strategy, in particular, it assisted in identifying national
health priorities.

2. National eHealth Strategic Direction
2.1 Vision
The strategic elements described below define the direction that eHealth will take in Namibia
over the next five years. The Vision has a foundation in Namibia’s Vision 2030. The national
eHealth Vision is:
A healthy nation enjoying a high standard of living and quality health and social services
welfare enabled by eHealth.
2.2 Mission
The national eHealth Mission statement is:
To provide the nation with a dynamic eHealth system that supports integrated continuity of
care that is accessible, affordable, equitable and is responsive to the needs of the population
to improve quality health and social welfare services for better health outcomes in Namibia.
2.3 eHealth System Goals and Outcomes
The primary goal of the strategy is to strengthen health and social welfare service delivery
through utilization of electronic solutions that address the needs of the people of Namibia.
The goal will be accomplished through the following outcomes, derived from interactions
with stakeholders in Namibia:
- All people within the health system accessing and sharing quality health information
reliably and securely, in a timely manner, across geographic and health sector
boundaries
- Enhanced efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of healthcare services at central,
district, facility and community levels
- Efficient and effective care to all patients
- Scarce financial and human resources are effectively deployed.
2.4 Guiding Principles
Implementation of the National eHealth Strategy will be guided by ten principles that express
the manner in which Namibia wishes to proceed. They are aligned with the Principles for
Digital Development and are listed in the table below.
Table 1: Guiding principles for eHealth in Namibia
Principle Description

Principle Description
1. Universal Health Coverage The strategy should promote UHC meaning that all people and
(UHC) communities can use the promotive, preventive, curative,
rehabilitative and palliative health services they need, of sufficient
quality to be effective, while also ensuring that the use of these
services does not expose the user to financial hardshipxiv
2. User-centric Systems emerging from the strategy should be designed with the user
in mind; and the use of the system should ensure a better experience
of the health system, thereby providing more patient-centric, health
worker-centric and citizen-centric services
3. Continuity of care Systems should support effective continuity of care for all patients,
along their care pathways
4. Data Security, Privacy and All data on patients’ health must be kept private and secure
Confidentiality
5. Non-discrimination and The strategy must support upholding fundamental human rights of
respect for human rights patients must be respected at all times, improving the health of all
persons irrespective of their social and economic status, or any other
differentiation
6. Adherence to global Use global standards, particularly open standards, and open source
standards on eHealth software wherever possible
practices
7. Accountability, Be data driven, promoting accountability through data use,
transparency and transparency and ensure accessibility of data and systems to all users
accessibility
8. Affordable and sustainable eHealth services should provide value for money for Namibia, being
health services affordable, sustainable, and delivering a net benefit over time for all
users
9. Sustainable partnerships to Be collaborative and build solutions that will scale and be sustainable
advance eHealth
10. Ensure adherence to global eHealth services should meet global standards across the different
standards of data quality dimensions of data quality such as accuracy, completeness,
consistency, timeliness, validity, and uniqueness.

3. Environmental Scanning
3.1 SWOT Analysis
Stakeholder consultations revealed substantial knowledge of strengths and weaknesses of
existing eHealth activities, as well as opportunities to move forward, and threats creating
risks. These are summarised in the tables below, each aligned to the components of the
WHO/ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit.
3.1.1 Leadership and Governance
Table 2: Leadership and governance SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
• There is support for overall computerization • There is need to strengthen intersectoral
from OPM coordination of eHealth activities
• There is strong management support for • The MoHSS has no policy/standard operating
eHealth from MoHSS procedure (SOP) on leadership and
• MoHSS has an Information Technology governance on electronic health information
Management Division supporting eHealth systems adaptation, integration,
activities, including key staff implementation and monitoring compliance.
• There are technical working groups for HIS • Limited donor coordination, especially for
and eHealth identification and implementation of eHealth
solutions
• Limited collaboration among various line
Ministries
• Limited human resource and technical
capacity
Opportunities Threats
• Fast-track the validation of the eHealth • Inadequate financial support for key eHealth
strategy being developed to meet the demand activities
• Support key eHealth staff at MoHSS with
relevant training-skills to manage eHealth
projects (project management, programme
management and requirements gathering)
3.1.2 Strategy and Investment
Table 3: Strategy and investment SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
● There are ongoing human resource ● There is limited budget to support eHealth
investments at NUST and UNAM in terms of
human resources for ICT
Opportunities Threats
● Investment opportunities with the OPM to ● Lack of continuous investment in maintaining
support connectivity and system development, and upgrading eHealth infrastructure and
management and maintenance workforce
● Opportunities to leverage universal service
funds (taxes from mobile operators) to
support eHealth
● Mobile tower expansion project with the

Ministry of ICT and the Mobile
Telecommunications Company to provide
100% population coverage and upgrading 2G
to 3G connectivity
3.1.3 Software Services and Software Applications
Table 4: Software services and software applications SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
● A number of patient level eHealth software ● Current systems are vertical and disease
systems are in use focused
● The Ministry of Defence has undergone a ● Some eHealth systems are deployed without
similar exercise regarding development of clearance from MoHSS
paperless record systems ● There are limited end user guides for certain
● Availability of baseline needs and system systems
requirements ● Current systems are not interoperable and
● Ministry of Defence has embarked on a don’t cover all patient encounters
similar system using a local public university
● Public universities have capacity to support
the Ministry with patient encounter systems
through design, development, research,
security and training
Opportunities Threats
● Extensive eHealth related work has already ● No roadmap for integration and
been undertaken interoperability of current systems
● There is a shared desire to develop in-house
solutions
● There is work underway to develop a unique
ID for health in Namibia
● WHO AFRO developing a Digital Health
Platform that provides a starting point for
country eHealth systems
● Engage users more in systems
conceptualisation and development
● Use current system requirements
documentation to update functionality
requirements for new system and systems
architecture
3.1.4 Standards and Interoperability
Table 5: Standards and interoperability SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
● There is an interoperability framework with ● There is limited health data and
the OPM interoperability implementation
● Data standards are in use including ICD 11 ● Limited awareness on health data and
and ICD 10 for mortality coding, HL7, and interoperability standards
HL7 FIHR ● Current approaches do not adequately support
● There are imaging systems deployed that the continuum of care
support PACS standards in radiology
Opportunities Threats
● The need for standards and interoperability is ● Continuity of care compromised
generally well acknowledged ● Patient safety concerns that are associated

● Fast-track the implementation of the OPM with eHealth systems
interoperability framework and extend it for
health services
● Develop an MoU with the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Immigration, Safety and Security for
data exchange
3.1.5 eHealth Infrastructure
Table 6: eHealth infrastructure SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
● 34 Hospitals are interconnected via ● Current hardware not compatible with
Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) workflow, such as desktop computers where
● Established Data Centre the workflow requires mobility
● There is good mobile coverage of 3G ● eGovernment connectivity not yet in all health
● There is technical support from the OPM facilities
● Hardware support and monitoring
mechanisms need to be strengthened
● Inadequate specifications for fit for purpose
hardware for usage in health
● Current hardware is mainly Desktop, which
limits health worker mobility in facilities, or
requires health workers to capture handwritten notes after consultations
Opportunities Threats
● Make available hardware specifications from ● Only intermittent power supply in some
OPM remote locations
● Collaborate with the Communications ● Funding constraints
Regulatory Authority of Namibia (CRAN)
and Ministry of ICT to get support for last
mile connectivity
3.1.6 Legislation, Policy and Compliance
Table 7: Legislation, policy and compliance SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
● The Overarching ICT Policy of the Ministry ● Current regulations are not visibly placed to
of ICT provides government guidelines for ensure end user compliance
ICT
● There is capacity from academia to support
minimum standards for data security
● The National Planning Commission (NPC)
has developed guidelines for the formulation
of public policies and strategies. The
guidelines have been approved by Cabinet.
● OPM has already developed administrative IT
Policies, Standards and Guidelines for IT
Divisions in the Public Service
● The Ministry of Health and Social Services
has a Directorate for Policy Planning
responsible for sector specific policies
Opportunities Threats
● Develop mechanisms to ensure that end users ● There are no confidentiality and privacy

are aware of the current electronic systems agreements with non-health staff, such as data
regulations clerks, who are accessing data
● Ensure data security and regulations are part ● Lack of specialised legal drafters
of health worker and ICT training in relevant ● Long process of drafting legislations
curricula
● Activities are underway with MICT in
consultation with Ministry of Justice to
strengthen legislation on Data Protection and
Cyber Crime
● Namibia has signed the African Union
Convention on Cyber Security and Personal
Data Protection
● Namibia has ratified the Malabo Convention
on Cyber Security and Data Protection
3.1.7 Workforce
Table 8: Workforce SWOT overview
Strengths Weaknesses
● MoHSS has technical staff to support ● Current ICT courses address nurses only and
electronic systems, including analyst need expanded scope
programmers. ● Current training opportunities for eHealth are
● There are courses for health worker ICT vertical
training and technical ICT worker training ● There is need to introduce project
with public universities. management at MoHSS training to support
● There is technical support available from eHealth implementation
public universities. ● There is a need to strengthen the analyst
● Public universities are working on eHealth programmer requirement gathering skills
education of pre-service personnel, covering through training
both health workers and ICT personnel
Opportunities Threats
● There is general awareness of electronic tools ● Community health workers have limited
and related applications opportunities for ICT basic skills
● Ongoing rapid growth in relevant eHealth and ● Negative economic climate results in cuts for
Health informatics curricula development at training opportunities for both health workers
the public universities such as NUST and ICT workers
● Build communities of practice for end users to
support peer learning and best practices, as
well as improve end user confidence
3.1.8 Emerging Opportunities for the Implementation of the eHealth Strategy
There are a number of opportunities for the implementation of the eHealth Strategy as
described below. Further details are in
User experience
eHealth is about transforming the user experience, particularly for patients and health
workers, so that their experience of the health system changes, care improves, and the health
and productivity of all users.
Engaging users in the development of systems is a key opportunity to improve user
experience and unlock the potential of eHealth solutions. It will result in better, more

integrated solutions and help to disrupt more traditional methods that have resulted in
fragmented, siloed information systems, which do not provide what users need.
Emerging technologies
Technology advances quickly, with new opportunities and innovations presenting
themselves. The eHealth Strategy provides priorities to help focus channelling resources to
Namibia’s most pertinent health needs, and a structure to help govern how these investments
are translated into value for Namibia. These advances require a minimum foundation of:
- Digital literacy
- Connectivity
- Alignment to health needs
- Sufficient evidence-base to avoid the risks of using unproven approaches.
Specific emerging technologies that offer potential value, if they can be adequately deployed
to serve Namibia’s health priorities, include:
- Mobile devices and the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT)
- Data science disciplines such as advanced analytics, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML)
- Emerging connectivity technologies such as Television whitespace and 5G
- Sensors to populate digital devices with data.
Opportunity of global goods
There are emerging global goods that offer rapid development of eHealth systems to provide
a Free and Open Source (FOSS) starting point. WHO AFRO has been developing a similar
system using mobile first, FOSS technologies, aligned with current trends. Namibia can use
these to grow local capacity.
Opportunity for a local eHealth ecosystem
There is opportunity for eHealth to contribute to long term local economic development and
sustainability through the growth of a vibrant local ecosystem of teams and organisations that
provide high quality information systems development, maintenance and support services.
This opportunity could be unlocked by investing deliberately to create the foundation for
growth and establish the critical mass of expertise necessary to coordinate the development
and maintenance of in-house solutions.
There is a need to explicitly describe how local opportunities can be taken as an advantage to
fast-track the implementation of the eHealth Strategy in Namibia.
3.2 PESTEL Analysis
A PESTEL analysis provides a different view of similar information. PESTEL analysis is a
tool or framework used to understand an environment and macro factors influencing it. Six
types of environmental influences are: political, economic, social, technological,
environmental and legal. These are inter-dependent with one another. The chart below plots
some of the issues driving these factors in the Namibian eHealth environment.

Poli9cal
• Support for computeriza9on from the Office of the Prime Minister
• MoHSS support for eHealth
Economic
• Inadequate financial support for key eHealth ac9vi9es
• There are opportuni9es to leverage universal services (taxa9on) funds
Social
• Desire for in-­‐house development
• Need beTer coordina9on of stakeholders
Technical
• Connec9vity is expanding, and requires further expansion
• The prolifera9on of mobile phones creates opportuni9es
• Several pa9ent level eHealth soWware systems are in use
• Work is underway to develop a unique iden9fier for health in Namibia
• Standards and interoperability issues are understood with some early work in
place, which needs to be expanded to an interoperability framework for
Namibia
• Opportuni9es have been created by the OPM
Environmental
• MoHSS has an ICT Division suppor9ng eHealth, including technical working
groups
• There's a need to strengthen intersectoral coordina9on
• Universi9es are working on eHealth educa9on of pre-­‐service personnel and
have poten9al to expand curricula for more cadres of health workers and health
ICT personnel
Legal
• Exis9ng data protec9on policy this needs to be supported by legisla9on
Figure 2: PESTEL analysis of the eHealth environment

4. eHealth Strategy
4.1 Strategic Areas of Focus and Objectives
Strategic objectives and corresponding interventions are divided according to the components
of the WHO/ITU National Digital Health Toolkit, which is illustrated in Figure 3 below.
Figure 3: Components of the WHO/ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit
4.1.1 Leadership and Governance
One of the key challenges affecting successful implementation of digital health solutions in
the Health Sector, is that of weak, uncoordinated and ineffective management frameworks.
For the eHealth Strategy to be effectively implemented, it requires dedicated leadership and
governance structures at all levels of implementation.
Table 9: Leadership and governance objectives and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
1. Leadership and coordination - Establish a National eHealth Steering Committee, chaired
of the eHealth Strategy by the MoHSS Executive Director to oversee inter-sectoral
implementation strengthened coordination for successful implementation of the eHealth
by end of 2021 strategy
- Establish an eHealth Management Committee (National,
Regional) comprising of MoHSS management
- Establish a National eHealth Projects Office accountable to
the eHealth Steering Committee, staffed by fully seconded
officials, to drive the implementation of the strategy, support
the Technical Working Groups, and support regional eHealth
implementation
- Multiple eHealth implementation teams from National
eHealth Projects Office
- Establish strategic partnerships for the implementation of the
eHealth strategy
2. Collaborative, integrated - Develop the eHealth Technical Working Groups (TWGs)
workings arrangements required to implement the eHealth plan, such as for Standards

established by 2021 and Interoperability, Regulation, Stakeholder Engagement,
Health Information Systems and other
- Host an annual stakeholder conference, led by MoHSS, with
active support from the National eHealth Steering Committee
3. Manage change effectively - Develop an effective, comprehensive change management
from 2022 plan for all the levels of the health system
- Implement required change management processes to secure
support from all stakeholders
4. Realise net benefits through - Implement an effective M&E framework for the eHealth
effective M&E Strategy
- Establish an Independent M&E unit
A proposed structure for the leadership and governance of the eHealth Strategy is as follows:
Na9onal eHealth Steering
CommiTee
eHealth Management
CommiTee (Na9onal, Regional)
Na9onal eHealth Projects
Office
eHealth Implementa9on
Teams
eHealth technical Working
Groups
Figure 4: Proposed national eHealth governance structure
4.1.2 Strategy and Investment
eHealth requires adequate and robust investment systems in place, and the components
required to develop, operate and sustain the national eHealth environment. Namibia will
require clear strategies and investment mechanisms to support effective implementation of
the eHealth strategy.

Table 10: Strategy and Investment objectives and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
1. Identify cost effective - Establish an eHealth Impact framework and use it to ensure
solutions and sustainable that eHealth systems achieve required health system benefits,
approaches for sustainably
implementation of the - Assess all eHealth systems prospectively, before finances are
eHealth strategy attained by allocated, to ensure that net benefits are realised

2. Mobilise sustainable long- - Establish the investment case to secure government budget for
term resourcing, including eHealth strategy implementation
providing domestic funding - Align private sector and donor investment in the eHealth
and coordinating strategy
international/donor - Establish a long-term approach for sustainable funding of
contributions to eHealth eHealth initiatives beyond deployment, to ensure eHealth
strategy implementation by system sustainability
2025 - Establish an investment committee to facilitate sound
management of eHealth investments
- Monitor the investment platform performance
- Ensure efficient use of existing resources
3. Create collaborative research - Establish an eHealth research and development agenda with
environment by 2022. academic institutions
4.1.3 Software Services and Software Applications
eHealth is about users, who use health information systems productively as part of an
integrated and effective health system. eHealth applications must meet these users’ needs.
Usability is a critical requirement.
Table 11: Services and applications objectives and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
1. National eHealth Platform - Identify priority user requirements and relevant applications
established by 2023 to address these needs
- Establishment of a comprehensive and integrated eHealth
management system inclusive of all required applications and
m-health apps, such as medical financial administrative, legal
compliances, and other aspects
- Establish an in-house electronic Patient Information
System
- Establish mechanisms to prevent duplicate notifications.
Unique identification can be used to address this (for
example, by issuing national identities; possibly identification
of the parents, or any identifier, such as biometrics).
- Principles of single source and single entry
- Business process re-engineering
2. Patients' experience of care - Establish a web-based and/or Apps engagement tool to
improved by implementing support implementation of the eHealth Strategy

Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
priority applications by 2022 - Keep patients engaged via notifications (SMS or in-app
notifications)
- Develop a core suite of modules, based on priority user
requirements, particularly the patient-user and clinical-user,
that are all integrated and interoperable
The in-house development will utilise WHO AFRO’s Digital Health Platform suite as a
starting point, allowing a rapid start-up in key facilities. Thereafter, expansion will take place
based on experience gained and performance achieved with this approach. This will be
further developed in line with Namibia user requirements.
Where appropriate to integrated systems, the architectural approach described by the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)xv will be utilised. It provides an overall
architectural approach for integrating eHealth systems.
Figure 5: Digital health platform architecture published by the ITU
4.1.4 Standards and Interoperability
Interoperability between different health information systems is a critical requirement for
these systems to provide the required holistic view of the health event or programme they
describe. It is achieved through several processes, most importantly the agreement of
information systems standards. These standards apply to many different parts of information
systems and promote the ability for systems to share information and thereby allow users to
have integrated views of health data.
An approach to these standards, or standards architectures, needs to be established, and
compliance enforced. It can involve following aspects of the health information system:
- Infrastructure
- Connectivity
- Operating systems
- Database management systems
- Applications
- Messaging between information systems
- Systems architectures.

Interoperability can be further supported by establishing an interoperability architecture that
simplifies the complexity of interfaces that need to be built between different information
systems by creating a mediation layer, often called a Health Information Mediator (HIM). All
systems in the environment build one interface to this mediation layer, and the mediation
layer manages subsequent sharing of information between multiple individual systems. A
unique ID is key to this HIM in order to share patient data between different systems.
Table 12: Standards and interoperability objective and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
1. Health information availability and - Establish the Namibia e-Health Standards and
sharing strengthened by 2022 Interoperability Framework which includes the
foundations of the Unique Identifier and incorporate
international standards such as ICD10, ICD 11 and HL7
which includes FHIR, etc. for data and information
exchange.
- Design the interoperability platform
- Implement the interoperability platform
- Publish interoperability artefacts for systems developers
to use
- Establish electronic Master Patient Index (MPI) for use
for the health system
- Establish national registries and data dictionaries
4.1.5 eHealth Infrastructure
Technology infrastructure is a critical requirement for eHealth. It includes a number of
aspects and has a close relationship with the eHealth workforce needed to establish, maintain
and support the infrastructure. Infrastructure aspects include at least the following:
- Workstations, potentially including a wide range of devices such as desktop PCs,
mobile tablets and mobile phones, which may be owned and managed by the MoHSS
or may be the personal devices of health workers, officials, ICT workers or patients,
known as Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
- Connectivity infrastructure both between facilities, and often within facilities, to
ensure that users have the connection they need to use their applications effectively
- Server hosting infrastructure, which includes the physical machines, as well as the
software that needs to be loaded onto those machines, maintained and supported, so
that the machines function optimally and securely.
Table 13: Infrastructure strategic objective and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
All users accessing eHealth tools by - Connect health facilities in the country with the minimum
end of 2024 bandwidth required for optimal access to eHealth systems
- Establish an effective and secure operational
environment for eHealth infrastructure, including
strengthening the MoHSS physical server hosting

Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
environment
- Provide health workers and ICT workers with necessary
equipment for accessing information
- National eHealth Service Desk hosted in MoHSS
4.1.6 Legislation, Policy and Compliance
For an effective implementation of eHealth strategy, policy and legislative frameworks are
essential. Policy and legislation will ensure coordination and collaboration among
stakeholders and that compliance of systems is adhered to. It is through legislation and policy
that challenges encountered by the country are addressed including coordination of eHealth
implementation and compliance to standards.
Legal and regulatory issues are among the most challenging aspects of eHealth: privacy and
confidentiality, liability and data-protection all need to be addressed in order to implement
eHealth. Rarely does a country have a coherent set of laws specifically designed to address
eHealth. Instead, eHealth has to be addressed within the existing or upcoming laws, policies,
standards and guidelines on professional liability, data protection etc.
Table 14: Legislation, policy and compliance objective and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
eHealth regulatory framework - Review policies and laws that govern eHealth in the
strengthened by end of 2023 country to produce a gap analysis
- Establish a roadmap for addressing the required
regulations
- Monitor compliance with the policies and laws
4.1.7 Workforce
Successful implementation of the eHealth strategy requires a pool of skilled and competent
manpower at all implementation levels. It is therefore critical that a comprehensive eHealth
human resource development strategy be developed and implemented to address manpower
shortages and technical capacity at central, district, hospital and facility levels.
Table 15: Workforce objectives and interventions
Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
Human resource capacity of - Develop an integrated eHealth Human Capital Development
MoHSS to implement eHealth plan for those managing and leading the eHealth Strategy,
Strategy strengthened by 2022 including aspects of conditions of service and staff retention
- Engage with partners/stakeholders to support implementation
of the eHealth Human Capital Development (HCD) plan
- Implement the eHealth HCD plan for those managing and
leading the eHealth Strategy
Build capacity of all end user - Implement the eHealth Human Capital Development plan for

Strategic Objective Strategic Intervention
categories (health workers, those managing and leading the eHealth Strategy
administrators) to effectively - Conduct training needs assessment for the workforce
implement the eHealth Strategy by - Train staff/end users in the skills required to use eHealth
2022 systems
- Implement appropriate eHealth solutions that respond to
workforce needs
- Create online user groups for the workforce as a platform to
learn, voice concern and solve problems.
Collaborate with training - Develop an eHealth training curriculum
institutions to produce skilled - Integrate ICT skills development in clinical staff training
personnel that will manage the - Seek accreditation for Health Informatics professionals with
eHealth Strategy by 2022 the Health Professions Councils of Namibia
4.2 Critical Success Factors
A successful eHealth strategy is one that delivers positive benefits for its stakeholders over
the period of the Strategy, enabled by ICTs. Critical success factors are listed below.
- The eHealth system should be viewed as a transformational tool to change healthcare
delivery and service provision; hence it should be championed by a high-level official
such as the Minister.
- Adequate funding for an eHealth ecosystem. Adequate funding for maintaining and
upgrading systems beyond systems deployment along with provision for adequately
trained health workers and ICT personnel.
- The system should be developed with its users and should be patient-centric, workercentric and citizen-centric.
- A well-defined eHealth architecture should contain protocols on data standards,
interoperability, security, privacy, confidentiality, the necessary laws and policies.
Infrastructure should include high-speed internet connectivity between facilities,
computing devices and equipment fit for purpose.
- Continuous capacity building of all stakeholders such as patients, health workers and
ICT workers.
- A robust Change Management strategy needs to be developed and implemented so that
all users become owners of the systems.
For further details, see Appendices:
- Appendix 1: The Strategy in Practice – Current and Future State
- Appendix 2: Strategic Implementation Plan
- Appendix 3: M&E Framework
- Appendix 4: Indicative Costing Estimates
- Appendix 5: Report on Alignment with WHO Digital Health Strategy
- Appendix 6: Report on Digital Health Lessons from COVID-19.

5. Glossary of Terms
eHealth The WHO definition for eHealth, states that “eHealth is the use
of ICTs for health”.xvi The term eHealth is one of many that
have been used over the last decade to describe the use of ICT
for various types of health systems strengthening. Other names
include health informatics, telemedicine, health ICT, mobile
health, and most recently, digital health. While there are
recognized differences in their meanings, eHealth and digital
health are frequently used as synonyms for each other.xvii
Digital Health WHO states “digital technologies can offer limitless
possibilities to improve health, from personal fitness to
building stronger health systems for entire countries. WHO is
determined to harness the positive potential of digital
technology to promote and protect the health of all people”.xviii
Universal Health Coverage WHO defines Universal Health Coverage as a situation where
“all people and communities can use the promotive, preventive,
curative, rehabilitative and palliative health services they need,
of sufficient quality to be effective, while also ensuring that the
use of these services does not expose the user to financial
hardship”.xix
Interoperability Interoperability in the health ecosystem is “the ability of
different information systems, devices and applications
(‘systems’) to access, exchange, integrate and cooperatively use
data in a coordinated manner, within and across organizational,
regional and national boundaries, to provide timely and
seamless portability of information and optimize the health of
individuals and populations globally. Health data exchange
architectures, application interfaces and standards enable data to
be accessed and shared appropriately and securely across the
complete spectrum of care, within all applicable settings and
with relevant stakeholders, including by the individual”.xx
Electronic medical record A real-time patient health record with “access to evidence-based
decision support tools that can be used to aid clinicians in
decision-making. The EMR can automate and streamline a
clinician’s workflow, ensuring that all clinical information is
communicated. It can also prevent delays in response that result
in gaps in care. The EMR can also support the collection of data
for uses other than clinical care, such as billing, quality
management, outcome reporting, and public health disease
surveillance and reporting”.xxi
Electronic health record “A longitudinal electronic record of patient health information
generated by when delivering services in any healthcare
delivery setting. Included in this information are patient

demographics, progress notes, problems, medications, vital
signs, past medical history, immunizations, laboratory data, and
radiology reports. The EHR automates and streamlines the
clinician’s workflow. It has the ability to generate a complete
record of the patient encounter, as well as supporting other carerelated activities directly via an interface, including evidencebased decision support, quality management, and outcomes
reporting”.xxi
ICD11 The International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision
(ICD11) is a global standard for diagnostic health information.
HL7 Health Level Seven International (HL7) provides “a framework
(and related standards) for the exchange, integration, sharing,
and retrieval of electronic health information. These standards
define how information is packaged and communicated from
one party to another, setting the language, structure and data
types required for seamless integration between systems. HL7
standards support clinical practice and the management,
delivery, and evaluation of health services, and are recognized
as the most commonly used in the world”.xxii
FHIR FHIR stands for Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource and
is a draft data standard developed by HL7 International. “FHIR
solutions are built from a set of modular components called
"Resources". These resources can easily be assembled into
working systems that solve real world clinical and
administrative problems at a fraction of the price of existing
alternatives. FHIR is suitable for use in a wide variety of
contexts”.xxii
Patient Care The term “patient care” in this document refers to the holistic
approach of patient and/or client within the health and social
welfare services domain.

Appendix 1: The Strategy in Practice –
Current and Future State
1. The Case for eHealth and Computerised Patient Care
The primary goal of an eHealth system is to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of
healthcare delivery and service provision by MoHSS and the country whilst reducing costs by
eliminating the duplication of services. Such a system should also ensure the confidentiality,
privacy, integrity and security of health data while improving the quality of care and
promoting the health and wellbeing of the nation.xxiii
This efficiency and effectiveness of an eHealth system is achieved by retaining the link
between the patient and the data collected over time and making the data accessible to
multiple healthcare providers as required.xxi ICTs have great potential to improve health,
increase quality and efficiency, and reduce the cost of healthcare and is an enabler for an
eHealth system. The healthcare providers should have access anywhere and anytime to a
single source of information for a single patient and should be able to update this record in a
timely manner at the source of service provided, irrespective whether it is in the field, mobile
clinic or bricks-and-mortar health facility.
This electronic data can also be aggregated to provide information about diverse issues such
as resource management, monitoring and evaluation, disease surveillance and operational
research spanning across communities, regions and countries on which public policy is
shaped.xxiii Furthermore, it is also useful for disease management such as HIV, TB, diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases, maternal and child health services where it can track the individual
health problems and treatment over time, giving insights into optimal diagnosis and
improving service delivery. With regards to treatment, medicine related issues such as
adverse drug reactions can be monitored and captured to avail data on safe use of the
medicines in different patient populations. Patient data can also be aggregated to give new
insights into trends and insights into health and diseases.
ICTs can also enable the patient to exercise self-care and have access to health information
via their mobile phones or social media. ICTs enables the communication between healthcare
worker and patient even in the absence of physical or mobile healthcare services.
Consider Nangula’s1 scenario described below to understand the benefits of eHealth.xiii
How eHealth would change Nangula’s experience
Nangula and her family live in a rural area in Namibia where over 52 per cent of the estimated 2.3
million people live. Nangula has recently been diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes. This happened
almost by chance, when she was visiting the nearest health centre with her daughter for a routine
1 This is a fictitious name and in no way relates to any known person

immunization. During the discussion with the doctor, Nangula reporting feeling frequently tired
herself. The doctor requested a blood test, which led to the diagnosis.
Nangula’s experience with the current health system
It takes Nangula and her family, including six children over three hours to walk to the health centre,
which has a visiting doctor from one of the regional hospitals. Nangula has not met this doctor before
and they are unlikely to meet again because the doctor will only be at the clinic for one day and has
over 100 patients to see and children to immunize.
While the doctor is administering the childhood immunization to her daughter, Nangula mentions she
is more tired than usual. The doctor orders a blood test which shows that Nangula is experiencing the
onset of Type 2 diabetes. Nangula’s doctor has only one minute to explain to her what Type 2
diabetes is and how to manage her symptoms. There is no paper-based information to give her, and
thus she must rely on the doctor and community health worker present to give her the information
she needs very quickly.
Walking back to her village from the clinic with her children, Nangula is confused, and does not
understand the implications of the diagnosis or how to manage her condition. She has no access to
written or electronic information on diabetes (such as information available via the Internet that she
could access from her mobile phone).
Nangula is very busy with her family and life goes on. Forgetting about her diagnosis, she does not
change her diet or level of exercise or receive further support for her condition. Over time Nangula
notices that she is becoming even more tired and is experiencing tingling in the toes of her left foot
and blurred vision. She is no longer able to walk the three hours to the health centre, and the
complications from her Type 2 diabetes are becoming more serious. She is now at great risk of
blindness, heart disease, nerve damage and loss of blood flow to her limbs, as well as kidney disease.
This means she that will no longer be able to look after her children adequately and is at risk of
premature death.
How eHealth would change Nangula’s experience with the health system
With growing mobile phone penetration in the country, Nangula’s experience could have been quite
different. For example, she has a mobile phone which could have been used to deliver mobile
eHealth (or mHealth) services. With the introduction of mHealth, the events that occurred in the
above scenario would have been different in the following ways:
∞ Pre-emptive care
Education – diet and general health information regarding diabetes could have been delivered to
Nangula via her mobile phone, telling her what she should and should not be eating in order to
manage her blood sugar levels better.
Helpline – a helpline could enable Nangula to get advice and consult about her diabetes with a health
worker or doctor. Nangula could receive dietary counselling to help manage her blood sugar levels,
and information on when a medical adviser would be at the nearest health centre if she needed to
make an appointment.
Treatment support – a mobile community health worker would visit Nangula’s village once a week
and provide it with Bluetooth–based blood glucose meters. Nangula could now regularly measure her

blood glucose level and upload this to a diabetes management service via mobile phone. This would
enable remote health-care providers to monitor her blood glucose levels and send her an SMS or
WhatsApp with health management information. She would also receive a weekly SMS or
WhatsApp with updated advice, and information, to help keep her focused and motivated.
∞Safer care
With the implementation of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) or summary records Nangula’s
medical practitioners would now be aware of her diagnosis and help her manage her chronic illness.
They would know to check her glucose levels when they meet and to review her treatment options,
prescribing medications if necessary.
∞More efficient use of a care provider’s time
Having access to Nangula’s EHR means that the visiting mobile community- based health worker
would no longer have to ask Nangula for her health information each time they meet. This record
would also be available to other medical professionals that Nangula may interact with either in
person or by phone.
In this scenario, Nangula is now much more successful in managing her Type 2 diabetes and in
avoiding the serious complications, because there is adequate monitoring of her condition and control
of her blood sugar levels. This means that her quality of life and life expectancy will be dramatically
improved, and she will be able to continue to work, and care for her family.
Figure 6: An adapted scenario of eHealth assisting in managing patient care
2. The Current State of eHealth
In Namibia, currently patient records are mostly manually recorded on paper-based medical
cards or health passports. The patient carries the medical record to all service providers in the
health ecosystem, but if it is lost, forgotten, or full, a new card is issued and all previous
medical history is lost. Therefore, multiple medical record cards can exist for a single patient
as there is no Unique ID or electronic lookup system in place.
There are fragmented and disparate eHealth systems in place at MoHSS which capture its
own data, however often the data is first captured manually and then recaptured on the
electronic systems. Although at least one of these silo systems captures the data directly, the
data is not shared across platforms and systems.
The first attempt at an eHealth system was made in 2011. USAID Namibia conducted a
Health Information System (HIS) assessment in 2012. A number of challenges were
identified such as internet connectivity between sites, infrastructure, data management and
skills shortage as well as 61 uncoordinated silo systems in operation. A HIS strategy was
developed that recommended the establishment of a HIS directorate and an IT Coordination
body.
The HIS are still fragmented and disparate, but progress has been made since 2011 when the
MoHSS first embarked on implementing an IHCIMS system. MoHSS has made strides in
implementing some of the recommendations in the Strategy such as forming a Health
Information and Research Directorate and appointing a Director to lead it. MoHSS has

formed an eHealth Steering Committee consisting of the Executive Director, Deputy
Executive Director and all Directors within MoHSS as well as a HIS Technical Working
Committee consisting of various other ministries and institutions. MoHSS has also
strengthened its ICT component by adding an Application Systems Development and
Maintenance subdivision and appointing staff for this subdivision.
MoHSS reviewed the 61 disparate systems identified in the HIS assessment in 2012 and still
has 13 systems of which 11 are functional, but only eight are owned by MoHSS. The rest are
third party service systems like IFMS, Meditech, eBirths and eDeaths. None of the systems
are deployed country-wide while the MHAISS systems for eBirths and eDeaths are only
accessible at facilities where such births or deaths are recorded.
According to the latest MoHSS Strategic Plan for 2017/2018 – 2021/2022, the PESTEL
analysis for the technological section identified the following critical issues:
- Unreliable and outdated technology, such as a system interruption caused by the
Human Capital Information Management
- Lack of required technology and equipment, such as MRI machine.
- Technological Skill Deficit
- Poor Maintenance
- Poor/Absence of network coverage in many remote areas.
Currently, some facilities of MoHSS are not connected to each other. However, positive
points for MoHSS are the network connectivity being deployed to interconnect the facilities
and the country’s mobile tower expansion project, MTC081Everyone. The mobile expansion
project not only expands mobile connectivity but also upgrades 2G to 3G connectivity in the
rural areas in an effort to meet the MICT’s mandate of providing 100% population
connectivity coverage.
Health workers lack ICT skills to capture and access data electronically and there might be
resistance to change from paper-based systems from all stakeholders. These basic ICT skills
are essential though to capture data at the point of service and in real-time. The equipment
and devices used for capturing the data should also be fit for purpose. For example, field
health workers should be able to capture the data via mobile devices such as tablets, laptops
or smartphones in the field. Furthermore, health workers should also be trained in disease
classification coding, understand and practice patient confidentiality, privacy and system user
security requirements.
The MoHSS Strategic Plan for 2017/18 – 2020/21 further shows that the challenge for the
legal section in the PESTEL analysis is outdated legislations that are barriers to the provision
of health services. This is equally true in terms of cyber laws such as laws dealing with the
protection of data and cyber-crimes as the policy gestation stage in Namibia is lengthy and
security of data and systems is at risk without redress in the legal system. Namibia has passed
the Electronic Transactions Act in 2019 and the Cyber Crimes has been drafted for tabling in
Parliament in 2020. The Data Protection bill is still being drafted.
The lack of a functional eHealth system results in Namibia not being able to effectively make
evidence-based decisions based on aspects such as individual and aggregate data for disease
control, resource management, M&E, and operations management. The patient’s longitudinal
history is not evident to all healthcare providers over his/her lifespan and therefore it is
difficult to provide for adequate interventions.

3. The Future State of eHealth
eHealth using an electronic health record (EHR) can solve many of the current and future
challenges. The EHR captures all information contained in the traditional paper-based
medical card including the health profile, behavioural and environmental information over
time and can be used by all healthcare providers. This EHR is entered and accessed
electronically by healthcare providers anywhere, anytime and over the patient’s lifespan. All
healthcare providers have access to the same information about the patient with the patient’s
consent. Access rights and privileges can also be imposed on various levels of administrators,
medical personnel and entities. Standards for an eHealth architecture, data, interoperability,
vocabulary, messaging and security needs to be implemented.
The fact that the patient’s EHR is one record connected with a Unique Identifier for the
patient, means that it is easier to manage privacy, confidentiality and integrity of the data and
enforce access privileges through security protocols. The various data sources making up a
sample EHR system is shown in the figure below.
Given Namibia’s existing and current expansion projects of mobile internet coverage, smart
device ownership, and ongoing upgrading of 2G to 3G networks and 4G networks, this EHR
can reduce healthcare provision and monitor costs across the country. The EHR can use mHealth to reach patients in remote areas to enable them and health workers to monitor their
progress and provide relevant information for self-care and general wellness. Social Media
can be used effectively to disseminate health information but also to monitor trends over time
using Big Data and Artificial Intelligence. As information from the individual EHR resides in
an integrated system, data can for example be aggregated to model disease outbreaks,
possible causes and interventions, hospital beds capacity, pharmaceutical needs, possible
adverse medicines reactions, predict each region’s healthcare requirements. A simplified
view of possible EHR components is provided in Figure 7.xxiii

Pa9ent
iden9fica9on
and
registra9on
Labs,
Clinical data, pathology,
threatement biochemistry,
and orders radiology
Electronic reports
Health Record
(EHR)
Previous
Disease
medical
classifica9on
records and
and coding
visits
Figure 7: A simplified view of an EHR system
Another important benefit of such a national eHealth system using the EHR is that data from
various emerging technologies such as Internet-of-Things and sensors can be automatically
captured in the same system and synthesised with global information sources. This
information-rich environment can benefit easily from Data Science, Bioinformatics and
Artificial Intelligence for healthcare. A further benefit is that data being captured at the
source, using mobile devices to populate the EHR, captures the data in real-time in the
presence of the patient. The patient can also manage their own health and wellness via mobile
apps and health information disseminated via social media platforms.
Such an eHealth system enabling ICT infrastructure can also facilitate eLearning for
continuous self-improvement and telemedicine. To realise such a benefit, initially a
comprehensive capacity building exercise needs to be conducted initially targeting health
workers and ICT workers and then extended to community level for awareness raising and
training of the various platforms. The video conferencing facilities at the various regional
centres at MoHSS and the local higher education institutions along with local and
international expertise can serve the needs for telemedicine and eLearning. The local higher
education institutions can provide capacity building and lifelong learning for health workers
and ICT workers.
The provision of healthcare service in Namibia is expensive, especially in rural and remote
areas given the size of the country and low population density. MoHSS strives to provide for
UHC but given the limited resources that emanates predominantly from the government,
eHealth services can reduce the cost burden and assist in providing health coverage to rural
and remote areas.

The Global Observatory Report for eHealth Series also discusses various studies showing that
the benefits of eHealth systems include:
- increased immunisation rates
- improved data collection
- increased staff productivity
- increased service satisfaction
- improved communication
- quality of care
- access to data
- reduced medical errors
- more efficient use of staff time
- improved patient registration
- Improvements in HIV care, paediatric care, radiology, pharmaceutical and laboratory
work
- increased adherence to guideline-based care
- enhanced surveillance and monitoring
- fewer medication-related errors such as incorrect prescriptions.
Such an eHealth system can be a transformational tool where the benefits exceed the initial
and ongoing investment in the system. Namibia has more challenges in the rural areas with
proper housing, sanitation, safe drinking water and bringing healthcare closer to the people.
The system can address these challenges by having healthcare workers and patients in the
urban as well as the remote and rural areas been able to access the patient’s health record
anywhere and anytime. The cost of healthcare service provision can be lowered for both the
patient and MoHSS through eHealth, m-Health, Telemedicine and social media. The
utilisation of eHealth also means that both patients and stakeholders in healthcare services
can make informed decisions and take control of the individual patients’, communities’ and
the country’s health. Thus, the nation can become more informed and healthier.

Appendix 2: Strategy Implementation Plan
The implementation plan is based on the Strategic Objectives and Strategic Interventions
described above. For each intervention, activities have been identified through stakeholder
engagements and allocated to years of the strategy.
Table 16: Implementation plan details
Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
SO.1.1: Leadership Establish a National Develop and 2021 Minister of Health
and coordination of eHealth Steering disseminate Terms of and Social
the implementation of Committee, chaired Reference (TOR) for the Services
the eHealth Strategy by the MoHSS National eHealth
strengthened by end Executive Director to Steering Committee,
of 2021 oversee inter-sectoral invite applications for
coordination for membership candidates,
successful and appoint members
implementation of the
eHealth strategy Develop an action plan 2021 National eHealth
for eHealth Steering
implementation at Committee
regional, district and
facility levels
Establish a Secretariat 2021 Executive
and Conduct regular Director: Ministry
committee engagements of Health and
to fulfil the TOR Social Services
Assign roles, 2021 Deputy Executive
responsibilities to the Director
existing positions within
MoHSS and create new
positions for the
effective
implementation of
eHealth strategy
Develop SOP for the
implementation of
eHealth strategy
Establish an eHealth Develop and 2021 Executive
Management disseminate Terms of Director: Ministry
Committee (National, Reference (TOR) for the of Health and
Regional) eHealth Management Social Services
Committee whose
membership consists of
MoHSS management
Establish a National Establish the TOR, 2022 National eHealth
eHealth Projects Structure and secure Steering
Office accountable to funding for a National Committee
the eHealth Steering

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Committee, staffed eHealth Projects Office
by fully seconded
officials, to drive the
implementation of the
strategy, support the
Technical Working Second personnel from 2022 National eHealth
Groups, and support MoHSS and other Steering
regional eHealth government entities to Committee
implementation staff the National
eHealth Project Office
Multiple eHealth Define and implement 2022 National Project
implementation teams the structure, timelines Office
from National and operations of the
eHealth Projects central and regional
Office eHealth Implementation
teams
Appoint/assign the 2022 National Project
eHealth Implementation Office
teams
Establish strategic Develop and publish a 2022 Director:
partnerships for the Data Governance Directorate of
implementation of the framework for health Health Information
eHealth strategy information, in and Research
coordination with
relevant stakeholders
Implement a programme 2022 Director:
on health promotion Directorate of
behaviour Health Information
and Research
Implement a programme 2022 Director:
of activities to inform Directorate of
and sensitise health Health Information
professional and Research
communities and lead
the required changes in
behaviour and practices
Host an annual eHealth 2022 National eHealth
stakeholder conference, Steering
supported by National Committee
eHealth Steering
Committee

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
SO.1.2: Collaborative, Develop the eHealth Establish different 2022 e-Health Steering
integrated working Technical Working specialised eHealth Committee
arrangements Groups (TWGs) Standards Technical
established in the required to implement Working Groups led by
MoHSS by end of the eHealth plan, such MoHSS
2021 as for Standards and
Interoperability, Establish MoUs with 2022 Executive
Regulation, key stakeholders such Director: Ministry
Stakeholder as, Ministry of ICT, of Health and
Engagement, Health Home Affairs, Telecom Social Services
Information Systems and others
and other
Host an annual eHealth 2022 National eHealth
stakeholder conference, Steering
supported by National Committee
eHealth Steering
Committee
SO.1.3: Manage Develop an effective, Identify the Change 2022 National eHealth
change effectively comprehensive Management Steering
from 2021 change management Champions and develop Committee
plan a comprehensive change
management plan
Implement required Identify and define the 2022 eHealth Steering
change management roles of change agents Committee
processes to secure across all Directorates
support from all and units in MoHSS to
stakeholders lead the change
management and
transformation plan
SO.1.4: eHealth net Implement an Present M&E milestones 2021 Deputy Executive
benefits secured effective M&E to the National eHealth Director (initially
through effective framework for the Steering Committee on a until 2022)
M&E of the strategy eHealth Strategy quarterly basis
from January 2021
Independent M&E Establish an 2023 National eHealth
unit Independent M&E unit Steering
to oversee the eHealth Committee
Strategy and
Implementation plan
SO. 2.1: Identify cost Establish an eHealth Develop an eHealth 2021 eHealth Steering
effective solutions Impact framework Impact framework and Committee and
and sustainable and use it to ensure define the parameters to Investment
approaches for that eHealth systems make the investment Committee
implementation of the achieve required case
eHealth strategy health system
attained by 2025 benefits, sustainably

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Assess all eHealth Conduct an impact 2022 eHealth Steering
systems assessment containing Committee and
prospectively, before among others the cost- Investment
finances are benefit analysis, publish Committee
allocated, to ensure this as reference
that net benefits are material and also as a
realised marketing tool
SO. 2.2: Mobilise Establish the Establish an investment 2021 National eHealth
sustainable long term investment case to committee to facilitate Steering
resourcing, including secure government sound management of Committee
providing domestic budget for eHealth eHealth investments
funding and strategy
coordinating implementation Submit an investment 2021 Executive
international/donor case for the eHealth Director: Ministry
contributions to Strategy for National of Health and
eHealth strategy Treasury and NPC to Social Services
implementation by consider addressing
2025 through voted funds and
donor support
Align private sector Develop a standard 2021 Investment
and donor investment Business Case template Committee /
in the e-Health for use by individual Executive
strategy initiatives based on the Director: Ministry
Investment Case of Health and
modules Social Services
Develop expression of 2022 Executive
interest for public/ Director: Ministry
private partnership to of Health and
support the Social Services /
implementation of National Project
specific eHealth Office
Strategy business cases
Incorporate specific 2022 Executive
business cases into Director: Ministry
donor application plans of Health and
and grant applications Social Services /
National Project
Office
Establish a long term Develop a long term 2021 Deputy Executive
approach for plan to maintain, Director
sustainable funding of upgrade and improve
eHealth initiatives eHealth systems beyond
beyond deployment, deployment
to ensure eHealth
system sustainability

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Monitor the Submit regular reports 2022 Executive
investment platform on action plans for Director: Ministry
performance discussion by the of Health and
investment committee Social Services /
National Project
Office
Monetize eHealth % of eHealth 2024 Director: Health
System maintenance costs Information and
recovered Research /
National eHealth
Steering
Committee
SO.2.3: Create a Establish research Develop eHealth 2021 Director: Health
collaboration research and development research theme and Information and
environment by 2021 agenda with academic concept note for NCRST Research /
institutions and academic National eHealth
institutions to consider Steering
Committee
SO.3.1: National Identify priority user Conduct a needs 2021 Director:
eHealth Platform requirements and assessment, with Directorate of
established by 2025 identify relevant extensive stakeholder Health Information
applications to engagement, and publish and Research
address these needs findings
Establish SOPs to guide 2021 Director:
software application Directorate of
development processes Health Information
and Research
Identify and prioritise 2022 Director:
critical applications to Directorate of
be developed Health Information
and Research
Establishment of a Develop and publish an 2021 National eHealth
comprehensive and over-arching systems Steering
integrated eHealth architecture to align Committee /
management system systems development Director:
inclusive of activities to the priorities Directorate of
applications of identified in the needs Health Information
medical financial assessment, which will and Research
administrative and be known as the
legal compliances National eHealth
Platform
Develop and publish 2022 Director:
policy guidelines Directorate of
requiring all Health Information
stakeholders to align and Research
development activities

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
to the National eHealth
Platform systems
architecture
Evaluate existing 2022 Director:
software and establish a Directorate of
roadmap for Health Information
transitioning them to the and Research
National eHealth
Platform architecture
Train key staff in 2021 Director:
PRINCE2 Project Directorate of
Establish an in-house
management Health Information
electronic Patient
and Research
Information System
Develop a Project 2022 Director:
Charter and establish a Directorate of
roadmap for developing Health Information
and implementing an in- and Research
house electronic Patient
Information System
Evaluate existing 2022 Director:
software solutions and Directorate of
establish a roadmap for Health Information
transitioning them to the and Research
electronic Patient
Information System
roadmap
Implement the roadmap 2022 Director:
to achieve a holistic Directorate of
patient-focused Health Information
electronic Patient and Research
Information System
Roll out the electronic 2025 Director:
Patient Information Directorate of
System to all facilities Health Information
and Research
Establish mechanisms Develop a plan to ensure 2022 National e-Health
to prevent duplicate that all patients can Steering
notifications. Unique access eHealth services. Committee / TWG
identification can be This includes providing
used to address this for different methods of
(for example, by patient identification and
issuing national patient enrolment using
identities; possibly multiple methods, such
identification of the as use of biometrics
parents, or any where no national
identifier e.g. Identification cards are
biometrics). not available

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Principles of single Define the policies and 2022 National e-Health
source and single SOPs guiding single Steering
entry source and single source Committee / TWG
entry
Business process re- Develop a 2022 Executive
engineering comprehensive plan for Director: MOHSS
Business Process Re- / National eHealth
engineering prior to Steering
eHealth system Committee
development
Examine previous 2022 National e-Health
processes and Steering
workflows of the Committee / TWG
current, fragmented
eHealth systems and
redesigning them to the
current needs of the
health sector
SO.3.2: Patients' Establish a web-based Implement a mobile 2022 Director:
experience of care and/or Apps and/or web-based Directorate of
improved by engagement tool to engagement tool to Health Information
implementing priority support support the effective and Research
applications by 2022 implementation of the collaboration of
e-Health Strategy stakeholders and
oversight of the eHealth
Strategy and its
Strategic Objectives
Provide patients with 2024 Director:
access to key Directorate of
information, such as Health Information
appointments, through a and Research
patient portal
Keep patients Notify patients about to 2022 Director:
engaged via key information, such as Directorate of
notifications, such as appointments, general Health Information
SMS or in-app health information, and Research
notifications using existing electronic
communication channels
Develop a core suite Establish a list of 2022 Director:
of modules, based on priority Apps and Directorate of
priority user applications to be built Health Information
requirements, and identify critical and Research
particularly the systems
patient-user and
clinical-user, that are Invite relevant 2023 Director:
all integrated and developers to develop Directorate of
interoperable the Apps and Health Information

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
applications aligned to and Research
the National eHealth
Platform and national
standards and
interoperability
framework
SO.4.1: Health Establish the Namibia Develop and publish a 2021 Director:
information e-Health Standards Normative Standards Directorate of
availability and and Interoperability Framework for all Health Information
sharing strengthened Framework which information systems, and Research
by 2022 includes the paper based and eHealth
foundations of the initiatives that clearly
Unique Identifier and defines SOPs for
incorporate implementing new HIS,
international adapting existing HIS,
standards such as HIS management and
ICD10, ICD 11 and prioritise standards for
HL7 which includes critical systems
FHIR, etc. for data
and information Develop a proof of 2021 Director:
exchange. concept for Unique ID Directorate of
approach and develop Health Information
national Unique Id and Research
strategy in line with
interoperability
strategies
Design the Develop an 2022 Director:
interoperability interoperability Directorate of
platform architecture for Health Information
Namibia’s eHealth and Research
initiatives
Design the technical 2022 Director:
approach to deliver the Directorate of
interoperability Health Information
architecture and Research
Establish registries Establish an electronic 2021 Director:
and national data national facility register Directorate of
dictionaries Health Information
and Research
Establish an electronic 2021 Director:
national data dictionary Directorate of
for the minimum Health Information
indicator and data set and Research
Establish an electronic 2024 Deputy Executive
national health Director
workforce register

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Implement the Secure the required 2022 Executive
interoperability human and Director: MOHSS
platform infrastructure resources
needed to build the
National eHealth
Platform
Develop key 2023 Director:
interoperability Directorate of
components of the Health Information
eHealth Platform, and Research /
specifically prioritising: National eHealth
the API for HIM, Master Steering
Patient index, Master Committee
facility list, Data
Warehouse, National
data dictionary and
minimum indicator set,
and registries
Deploy and maintain the 2023 Director:
National eHealth Directorate of
Platform Health Information
and Research
Publish Publish the national 2024 National eHealth
interoperability interoperability Steering
artefacts for systems framework Committee
developers to use
Establish electronic Establish electronic 2023 Director:
Master Patient Index Master Patient Index Directorate of
(MPI) for use for the (MPI) for use for the Health Information
health system health system and Research /
National eHealth
Steering
Committee
Establish registries Establish an electronic 2023 Director:
and national data national facility register Directorate of
dictionaries Health Information
and Research
Establish an electronic 2021 Director:
national data dictionary Directorate of
for the minimum Health Information
indicator and data set and Research
Establish an electronic 2024 Deputy Executive
national health Director
workforce register

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
SO.5.1: All users Connect health Establish a minimum 2021 Director:
accessing eHealth facilities in the specification for Directorate of
tools by end of 2024 country with the connectivity required by Health Information
minimum bandwidth the MOHSS, detailing and Research
required for optimal specifications for
access to eHealth different types of
systems facilities, and different
types of users
Implement a regular 2022 Director:
update schedule to Directorate of
update this specification Health Information
according to new and Research
applications emerging in
the Namibian eHealth
environment, including
WIFI access for patients
Continued dialogue with Director:
the telecommunications Directorate of
authorities to support Health Information
mobile and the case for and Research
eHealth expansion for
the last mile and
leveraging universal
services funds
Complete the rollout of 2022 Executive
national connectivity to Director: MoHSS
support the minimum
connectivity
specification
Establish an effective Identify the most 2021 Director:
and secure appropriate server Directorate of
operational hosting approach to Health Information
environment for e- meet the needs of and Research
Health infrastructure, National services and
including applications, and
strengthening the interoperability platform
MoHSS physical
server hosting Develop a master 2021 Director:
environment configuration plan for Directorate of
the server infrastructure Health Information
approach identified and Research
Procure the appropriate 2022 Director:
infrastructure and/or Directorate of
services for the server Health Information
infrastructure approach and Research
identified

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Establish SOPs for all 2022 Director:
key systems Directorate of
administration Health Information
processes, including and Research
user management, server
management, instance
management, and
security
Develop policy 2022 Director:
document for all Directorate of
systems administration Health Information
processes, aligned to the and Research
eHealth Strategy
Train all relevant 2023 Director:
stakeholders on SOPs Directorate of
Health Information
and Research
Initiate a regular internal 2023 Deputy Executive
audit cycle of all SOPs Director
Provide health Develop a minimum 2021 Director:
workers and ICT specification for user Directorate of
workers with devices fit for purpose Health Information
necessary equipment for health workers, ICT and Research
for accessing workers
information
Develop a plan for 2021 Director:
bringing devices up to Directorate of
the minimum Health Information
specification and Research
Develop a policy on 2021 Director:
BYOD for health Directorate of
workers, ICT workers, Health Information
patients and Research
Develop a pro-active 2022 Director:
maintenance and Directorate of
replacement plan for all Health Information
devices, including a plan and Research
for supply of
consumables, where
appropriate
Establish registries Establish an electronic 2021 Director:
and national data national facility register Directorate of
dictionaries Health Information
and Research
Establish an electronic 2021 Director:
national data dictionary Directorate of

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
for the minimum Health Information
indicator and data set and Research
Establish an electronic 2024 Deputy Executive
national health Director?
workforce register
National eHealth Establish a National 2024 National Project
Service Desk hosted eHealth Service Desk Office
in MoHSS hosted in MoHSS
SO.6.1: eHealth Review policies and Review eHealth strategy 2021 Director:
regulatory framework laws that govern and identify priority Directorate of
strengthened by end eHealth in the regulatory aspects Health Information
of 2024 country to produce a and Research
gap analysis
Identify appropriate 2021 Director:
regulatory process for Directorate of
each priority regulatory Health Information
aspect (Policy and/or and Research
Guideline and/or
Legislation)
Draft regulatory 2022 Director:
documents in Directorate of
consultation with Health Information
stakeholders and Research
Establish a roadmap Establish a roadmap to 2024 Deputy Executive
for addressing the address the gaps Director
required regulations identified with
legislation, policies,
SOPs, guidelines
Publish regulations after 2024 Deputy Executive
processing through Director
appropriate channels
Publish specific policy 2024 Deputy Executive
and regulations on Director: MoHSS,
cybersecurity, data OPM and Ministry
protection and local of ICT
"home-grow" solution
development
Monitor compliance Conduct regulatory 2024 Director:
with the policies and compliance testing on Directorate of
laws priority aspects, across Health Information
all implementers in and Research
Namibia
SO.7.1: Human Develop an integrated Engage with MOHSS 2021 HIRD
resource capacity of eHealth Human management and
MoHSS to implement Capital Development stakeholders to identify

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
eHealth Strategy plan for those capacity development
strengthened by 2022 managing and leading requirements and
the eHealth Strategy, opportunities for the
including aspects of workforces
conditions of service
and staff retention Develop and publish a 2022 Director:
comprehensive human Directorate of
resources development Health Information
plan for eHealth and Research
Engage with Consultations with 2021 Director:
partners/stakeholders partners/stakeholders to Directorate of
to support develop eHealth training Health Information
implementation of the strategies and Research
eHealth Human
Capital Development Implementation of the 2022 Directorate Human
(HCD) plan workforce strengthening Resources
plan
Include the 2022 Director:
establishment of an Directorate of
eHealth Leadership Health Information
Development and Research
programme
Implement the Engage with 2021 Director:
eHealth HCD plan for implementation Directorate of
those managing and stakeholders to identify Health Information
leading the eHealth requirements and and Research
Strategy opportunities to support
a workforce
strengthening plan
Create incentives for 2023 Executive
local ICT organisations Director: MOHSS
to recruit and retain
local ICT professionals
to contribute to systems
development and
maintenance for the
eHealth Strategy
SO.7.2: Build Implement the Manage effective 2023 HR Director/
capacity of all end eHealth Human implementation of the Director:
user categories (health Capital Development implementation Directorate of
workers, plan for those workforce strengthening Health Information
administrators) to managing and leading plan and Research
effectively implement the eHealth Strategy
the eHealth Strategy Improve human resource 2023 HR Director/
by 2023 management system to Director:
encourage problem Directorate of
solving regarding use of Health Information
eHealth solutions and Research

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
Develop eHealth skills 2023 HR Director/
retention policy in Director:
consultation with Directorate of
stakeholders Health Information
and Research
Conduct training Conduct training needs 2022 HR Director/
needs assessment for assessment for the Director:
the workforce workforce Directorate of
Health Information
and Research
Train staff/end users Partner with local higher 2022 Director:
in the skills required education institutions Directorate of
to use eHealth and NIPAM to conduct Health Information
systems staff training (health and Research /
workers and ICT National eHealth
workers) Steering
Committee
Offer basic ICT training 2022 National eHealth
to existing health Steering
workers through a local Committee
institution
Implement on-job 2023 HR Director/
training and e-Learning Director:
for currently employed Directorate of
workforce, especially Health Information
for application/system and Research
specific training
Conduct Training-of- 2022 HR Director/
Trainers for nursing and Director:
medical training staff on Directorate of
eHealth strategy and Health Information
ICT and Research
Implement Conduct training needs 2022 HR Director/
appropriate eHealth analysis for the existing Director:
solutions that respond workforce Directorate of
to workforce needs Health Information
and Research
Create user groups for 2022 HR Director/
the workforce as a Director:
platform to learn, voice Directorate of
their concerns and solve Health Information
problems and Research
S.O. 7.3: Collaborate Develop eHealth Collaborate with 2021 National eHealth
with training training curricula for institutions of higher Steering
institutions to produce different ICT workers learning and other Committee/
skilled personnel who stakeholders to develop

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity Deadline Accountability
will manage the and health workers and/or adapt appropriate
eHealth Strategy by training programs

Develop modularised 2022 National eHealth
eHealth training Steering committee
curricula for health / Director:
workers and ICT Directorate of
workers separately Health Information
and Research
Partner with local 2021 Director:
Higher Education Directorate of
Institutions (HEIs) to Health Information
develop the Health and Research
Informatics curriculum /Local HEIs
Integrate ICT skills Integrate ICT skills 2022 Director:
development in development in clinical Directorate of
clinical staff training staff training Health Information
and Research
Seek accreditation for Enter into a dialogue 2022 Director:
Health Informatics with the Health Directorate of
professionals with the Professions Councils of Health Information
Health Professions Namibian about and Research
Councils of Namibia accreditation
(HPCNA)
Submit the proposed 2024 Director:
modularised eHealth Directorate of
training curricula for Health Information
various type of workers and Research
for approval by HPCNA
and NQA

Appendix 3: Monitoring and Evaluation
Framework
Effective implementation of the eHealth Strategy requires a Monitoring and Evaluation
(M&E) framework. The M&E framework deals with each of the strategic components of the
strategy, outcome indicators which will be used to determine the performance level of
achieving each Strategic Objective, and both baseline and targets for each intervention. The
data source is also listed.
The M&E framework will guide the MoHSS in identifying the most valuable and efficient
use of resources, while at the same time guiding strategic information required for the
implementation of the eHealth Strategy. The M&E framework will help to improve
performance and achieve the anticipated results for each Strategic Pillar, Strategic Objective
and Interventions. The M&E framework will also improve current and future performance
and management of outputs, outcomes and impact.
Table 17: M&E framework
Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
SO.1.1: Establish a National Terms of National 1 1 1 1 1
Leadership and eHealth Steering Reference (TOR) eHealth
coordination of Committee, chaired for the National Steering
the by the MoHSS eHealth Steering Committee
implementatio Executive Director Committee exist TOR and
n of the and might include and members organogram
eHealth MoHSS Directors appointed
Strategy among its members
strengthened to oversee inter- Action Plan for eHealth Action 1 1 1 1 1
by end of 2021 sectoral eHealth Plan
coordination for implementation at
successful regional, district
implementation of and facility levels
the eHealth strategy developed.
Secretariat Minutes of 2 4 4 4 4
established and secretariat
regular committee meeting
engagements
fulfilled
(Quarterly)
Roles and SOP and Job 1 1 1 1 1
responsibilities descriptions
assigned to the
existing positions
within MoHSS
and new positions
created for eHealth
strategy

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
SOP for the SOP 1 1 1 1 1
implementation of
eHealth strategy
developed
Establish an eHealth Terms of eHealth 1 1 1 1 1
Management Reference (TOR) Management
Committee for the eHealth Committee
(National, Regional) Management TOR and
Committee whose organogram
membership
consist of MoHSS
management
(created)
Establish a National TOR and structure Project Office 0 1 1 1 1
eHealth Projects established; TOR,
Office accountable funding secured Organogram
to the eHealth for a National and Budget
Steering eHealth Projects
Committee, staffed Office
by fully seconded
officials, to drive Personnel Project Office 0 1 1 1 1
the implementation seconded from organogram
of the strategy, MoHSS and other
support the government
Technical Working entities to staff the
Groups, and support National eHealth
regional eHealth Project Office
implementation
Multiple eHealth The structure, Action Plan 0 1 1 1 1
implementation timelines and document
teams from National operations of the
eHealth Projects central and
Office regional eHealth
Implementation
teams established
eHealth HR records 0 1 1 1 1
Implementation
Teams in place
teams assigned
Establish strategic Proportion of MOUs Signed 0 10 50 100 100
partnerships for the signed Key
implementation of Stakeholders
the eHealth strategy MoUs
A Data Data 0 Yes Yes Yes Yes
Governance Governance
framework for Framework
health information, document in

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
established and place (Yes/No)
published
A programme on Electronic and 0 Yes Yes Yes Yes
health promotion print media ads,
behaviour brochures.
developed Health
promotion
programme in
place
A programme of Activity plan in No Yes Yes Yes Yes
activities to inform Place
and sensitise
health professional
communities and
lead the required
changes in
behaviour and
practices
implemented
An annual eHealth Conference 0 1 1 1 1
stakeholder programme and
conference hosted report
SO.1.2: Develop the eHealth Establish Quarterly TWG 0 2 4 4 4
Collaborative, Technical Working specialised meeting
integrated Groups (TWGs) eHealth Standards minutes
working required to Technical
arrangements implement the Working Groups
established in eHealth plan, such led by MoHSS
the MoHSS by as for Standards and established
end of 2022 Interoperability,
Regulation, Proportion of TORs adopted 0 50 100 100 100
Stakeholder TWG Terms of
Engagement, Health Reference adopted
Information (%)
Systems and other
SO.1.3: Develop an Change Change 0 1 1 1 1
Manage effective, Management management
change comprehensive Champions plan
effectively change management identified and a
from 2022 plan comprehensive
change
management plan
developed
Implement required Roles of change List of Change 0 1 1 1 1
change management agents across all management
processes to secure Directorates and agents
support from all units in MoHSS to

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
stakeholders lead the change
management and
transformation
plan identified and
assigned
SO.1.4: Implement an M&E framework eHealth Annual 0 1 1 1 1
eHealth net effective M&E implemented progress report
benefits framework for the
secured eHealth Strategy Independent M&E M&E TOR and 0 1 1 1 1
through unit established M&E unit with
effective M&E staff in place
of the strategy
from January

SO. 2.1: Establish an eHealth An eHealth Impact eHealth Impact 0 1 1 1 1
Identify cost Impact framework framework framework
effective and use it to ensure established
solutions and that eHealth
sustainable systems achieve
approaches for required health
implementatio system benefits,
n of the sustainably
eHealth
strategy Assess all eHealth An impact Impact 0 0 1 1 1
attained by systems assessment Assessment
2025 prospectively, published report
before finances are
allocated, to ensure
that net benefits are
realised
SO. 2.2. Establish the An eHealth 0 1 1 1 1
Mobilise investment case to investment
sustainable secure government committee
long term budget for eHealth established
resourcing, strategy
including implementation An investment eHealth 0 1 1 1 1
providing case for the Investment case
domestic eHealth Strategy
funding and for National
coordinating Treasury and NPC
international/d to consider
onor addressing through
contributions voted funds and
to eHealth donor support
strategy submitted
implementatio
n by 2025 Align private sector Standard Business MoHSS Annual 0 1 1 1 1
and donor Case template Plan
investment in the e- completed

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
Health strategy
Expression of PPPs 0 1 1 1 1
interest for PPPs engagement
developed framework
implementation of
specific eHealth
Strategy business
cases
Number of MoHSS Annual 0 3 3 3 3
concluded PPPs in Plan
eHealth
Specific business Grant 0 1 1 1 1
cases for donor applications list
application plans
and grant
applications
developed
Establish a long A long-term plan Project 1 1 1 1
term approach for to maintain, Management

sustainable funding upgrade and Plan / MoHSS
of eHealth improve eHealth Annual Plan
initiatives beyond systems beyond
deployment, to deployment
ensure eHealth developed
system
sustainability
Monitor the Number of Investment 1 4 4 4 4
investment platform investment Committee
performance committee reports
meetings
SO 2.3 Create Establish an eHealth Proportion of MoHSS Annual 0 25 50 75 100
a collaborative research and Research & Plan
research by development agenda development
2022. with academic agenda items
institutions. funded (%)
SO.3.1: Identify priority Proportion of OPM/MoHSS/ 0 85 100 100 100
National user requirements priority WHO
eHealth and identify application
Platform relevant identified and
established by applications to relevant
2025 address these needs applications
implemented and
operational by

SO.3.1: Identify priority Needs assessment, Needs 0 1 1 1 1
National user requirements with extensive assessment

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
eHealth and identify stakeholder report
Platform relevant engagement, with
established by applications to published findings
2025 address these needs
SOPs to guide Software 0 1 1 1 1
software application
application development
development SOP
processes
developed
Identify and Applications 0 1 1 1 1
prioritise critical priority
applications to be schedule
developed
Establishment of a National eHealth National 0 0 1 1 1
comprehensive and Platform eHealth
integrated eHealth alignment Platform
management system framework alignment
inclusive of developed document
applications of
medical financial Policy guidelines Policy on 0 0 1 1 1
administrative and published for systems
legal compliances alignment of alignment
activities to the
National eHealth
Platform systems
architecture
National eHealth National 0 0 0 1 1
Platform eHealth
architecture Platform
roadmap document
developed
Establish an in- Proportion of key Training report 0 20 90 90 90
house electronic staff trained in
Patient Information PRINCE2 Project
System management (%)
A Project Charter Electronic 1 1 1 1 1
developed and a patient
roadmap information
established for system
developing and development
implementing an document
in-house electronic
Patient
Information
System

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
Existing software Report on 0 0 1 1 1
solutions software
evaluated and solutions
roadmap transitioning
established for Plan
transitioning them
to the electronic
Patient
Information
System roadmap
Roadmap HIRD Strategic 1 1 1 1 1
implemented to plan
achieve a holistic
patient-focused
electronic Patient
Information
System
Proportion of Action plan / 5 40 60 80 100
health facilities MoHSS Annual
implementing Plan
Electronic Patient
Information
System rolled out
to all facilities (%)
Establish Unique identifier HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
mechanisms to developed and plan / MoHSS
prevent duplicate implemented Annual Plan
notifications.
Unique
identification can be
used to address this
(for example, by
issuing national
identities; possibly
identification of the
parents, or any
identifier e.g.
biometrics).
Principles of single The policies Single source 0 0 1 1 1
source and single guiding single and single
entry source and single source entry
source entry Policy
defined
Business process re- A comprehensive BPR Plan 1 1 1 1 1
engineering plan for Business
Process Reengineering prior

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
to eHealth system
development is
developed
S.O. 3.2: Establish a web- Proportion of Logs of number 0 10 40 80 100
Patients' based and/or Apps Mobile/Web-based of registered
experience of engagement tool to engagement tool and active users
care improved support established and using the tool
by implementation of implemented (%)
implementing the e-Health
priority Strategy
applications by
2022 Keep patients Notifications sent System No No Yes Yes Yes
engaged via from the system Notification
notifications (e.g. report
SMS or in-app
notifications)
Develop a core suite Proportion of user- OPM/MoHSS/ 0 100 100 100 100
of apps, based on friendly patient WHO
priority user apps based on
requirements, priority user
particularly the requirements
patient-user and developed (%)
clinical-user, that
are all integrated
and interoperable
S.O.4.1: Health Establish a National Interoperability The Namibia e- 0 Yes Yes Yes Yes
information standards and Standards Health
availability and interoperability framework Standards and
sharing framework, developed and Interoperability
strengthened including the published. Framework
by 2022 foundations of the document
unique identifier,
and incorporate Unique ID proof 1) Unique 0 Yes Yes Yes Yes
international of concept Identifier
standards like developed Concept Report
ICD11, ICD10 and
National Unique 2) National
HL7, which
Id strategy in line Unique
includes FHIR, etc.
with Identifier
for data and
interoperability Interoperability
information
strategies Strategy
exchange, aligned
developed Document
with the national
interoperability
framework
Design the Interoperability The Namibia e- No Yes Yes Yes Yes
interoperability architecture for Health
platform Namibia’s eHealth Interoperability
initiatives Architecture
Reference

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
developed Document
Technical Interoperability No Yes Yes Yes Yes
approach to architecture
deliver the Implementation
interoperability plan
architecture
developed
Identify core Core Systems Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
systems for Interoperability
interoperability Document
and information
exchange
Implement the Proportion of the HIRD Quarterly 20 45 65 100 100
interoperability required human Report
platform and infrastructure
resources needed
to build the
National eHealth
Platform secured
(%)
Proportion of HIRD Quarterly 0% 30 70 90 100
priority Report
interoperability
components
developed for
eHealth Platform
(%) Priority
components
include: API for
HIM, Master
Patient Index,
Master Facility
List, Patient Level
Data Warehouse,
National Data
Dictionary and
Minimum
Indicator Set, and
registries.
Proportion of sites HIRD Quarterly 0 30 60 80 100
implementing Report
interoperability
platform (%)
Publish The national HIRD Quarterly No No Yes Yes Yes
interoperability interoperability Report
artefacts for systems framework

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
developers to use published
Establish electronic Electronic Master The Namibia e- No No Yes Yes Yes
Master Patient Patient Index Health
Index (MPI) for use (MPI) for use for Interoperability
for the health the health system Architecture
system established Reference
Document
Establish registries Registries and HIRD Quarterly No No Yes Yes Yes
and national data national data Report
dictionaries dictionaries
established
S.O.5.1: All Connect health A minimum HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
users accessing facilities in the specification for plan
eHealth tools country with the connectivity set
by end of 2024 minimum
bandwidth required A regular update HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
for optimal access schedule to update plan
to eHealth systems this specification
according to new
applications
emerging in the
Namibian eHealth
environment,
including WIFI
access for patients
established
Engagement Engagement Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
framework with framework
the
telecommunication
s authorities to
support mobile
and the case for
eHealth expansion
for the last mile
and leveraging
universal services
funds developed
Proportion of sites MoHSS Annual 10 40 60 80 100
linked to national Report
connectivity to
support the
minimum
connectivity
specification (%)
Establish an Hosting of HIRD Strategic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
effective and secure National services

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
operational and applications, plan
environment for e- and
Health interoperability
infrastructure, platform in place
including
strengthening the Master HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
MoHSS physical configuration plan plan
server hosting for the server
environment infrastructure in
place
Proportion of sites HIRD Strategic 5 30 80 100 100
with appropriate plan
infrastructure
procured (%)
SOPs established HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
for all key systems plan / SOPs
administration
processes,
including user
management,
server
management,
instance
management, and
security
Policy document Policy No Yes Yes Yes Yes
developed for all
systems
administration
processes, aligned
to the eHealth
Strategy
Proportion of Training report 10 40 70 100 100
relevant
stakeholders
trained on SOPs
(%)
A regular internal Internal Audit No Yes Yes Yes Yes
audit cycle of all schedule
SOPs established
Provide health A minimum HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
workers and ICT specification for plan
workers with user devices fit for
necessary purpose (health
equipment for workers, ICT
accessing workers)

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
information developed
A plan for HIRD Strategic No Yes Yes Yes Yes
bringing devices plan
up to the minimum
specification
developed
A policy on BYOD Policy No Yes Yes Yes Yes
BYOD (health
workers, ICT
workers, patients)
developed
A pro-active Device Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
maintenance and Maintenance
replacement plan policy
for all devices,
including a plan
for supply of
consumables,
where appropriate,
developed
Establish registries An electronic HIRD Strategic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
and national data national facility plan
register
established
An electronic HIRD Strategic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
national data plan
dictionary for the
minimum
indicator and data
set established
An electronic HIRD Strategic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
national health plan
workforce register
established
National eHealth A National Service Desk No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Service Desk hosted eHealth Service exists / HIRD
in MoHSS Desk hosted in Strategic plan
MoHSS
established
SO.6.1: Review policies and eHealth strategy Policy Review No No Yes Yes Yes
eHealth laws that govern and priority Report
regulatory eHealth in the regulatory aspects
framework country to produce a identified

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
strengthened gap analysis
The appropriate Analysis report No No Yes Yes Yes
by end of 2024
regulatory process legal instrument
for each priority identified for
regulatory aspect review
instrument
identified (Policy
and/or Guideline
and/or Legislation)
completed
Draft regulatory eHealth No Yes Yes Yes Yes
documents (Policy Steering
and/or Guideline Committee
and/or Legislation) Progress report
in consultation
with stakeholders
existing
Establish a roadmap A roadmap to eHealth No Yes Yes Yes Yes
for addressing the address the gaps Steering
required regulations identified with Committee
legislation, progress reports
policies, SOPs, /Roadmap
guidelines
established
Regulations Number of No No Yes Yes Yes
published after regulatory
processing through documents
appropriate published
channels
Specific policy Number of No Yes Yes Yes Yes
and regulations on specific policy
cybersecurity, data and regulations
protection and on
supporting local cybersecurity
"home-grown" and data
solution protection
development published
published
Monitor compliance Number of audit Audit Reports 1 2 2 2 2
with the policies and compliance
and laws assessment on
priority aspects
across all
implementers in
Namibia
completed
SO.7.1: Build Develop an Capacity eHealth No Yes Yes Yes Yes

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
capacity of integrated eHealth development Steering
MoHSS to Human Capital requirements Plan Committee
implementatio Development plan developed reports
n team for those managing
strengthened and leading the Comprehensive HCD Plan No Yes Yes Yes Yes
by 2021 eHealth Strategy, human resources
including aspects of development plan
conditions of for eHealth
service and staff developed and
retention published
SO.7.2 Human Implement the Workforce eHealth No Yes Yes Yes Yes
resource eHealth HCD plan strengthening plan Steering
capacity of for those managing and Committee
MoHSS to and leading the implementation report /
implement eHealth Strategy framework in MOHSS
eHealth place Annual Plan
strategy
strengthened Human resource eHealth No Yes Yes Yes Yes
by 2022 management Steering
system to Committee
encourage report /
problem solving MOHSS
implemented Annual Plan
eHealth skills Retention No Yes Yes Yes Yes
retention policy policy
developed
Train staff/end users Partner framework Signed MOUs No Yes Yes Yes Yes
in the skills required with local higher
to use eHealth education
systems institutions and
Nipam to conduct
staff training
(health workers
and ICT workers)
developed
Proportion of Training reports 20 60 80 90 100
health workers
empowered with
basic ICT training
to existing through
a local institution
(%)
Implementation of Training reports No Yes Yes Yes Yes
on-job training and
e-Learning
framework for
currently
employed

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
workforce,
especially for
application and
system specific
training
Training-of- Number of TB
Trainers for trainees D
nursing and
medical training
staff on eHealth
strategy and ICT
conducted
Appropriate eHealth Training needs Training needs No Yes Yes Yes Yes
solutions that analysis for the analysis report
respond to existing workforce
workforce needs conducted
implemented
user groups for the Platform in No Yes Yes Yes Yes
workforce place
platform for
learning, voicing
their concerns and
solve problems
developed
SO. 7.3: Develop eHealth Collaborate MOUs / No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Collaborate training curricula framework with Agreements /
with training for different ICT institutions of Curriculum
institutions to workers and health higher learning documents
produce skilled workers and other
personnel who stakeholders to
will manage develop and/or
the eHealth adapt appropriate
Strategy by training programs
2025 developed
Develop Curricula No Yes Yes Yes Yes
modularised
eHealth training
curricula for health
workers and ICT
workers separately
Partnership Curriculum No Yes Yes Yes Yes
framework with
local Higher
Education
Institutions (HEIs)
to develop the
Health Informatics

Target
Strategic Outcome Means of
Intervention
Objective indicator Verification
‘21 ‘22 ‘23 ‘24 ‘25
curriculum
Integrate ICT skills Integrated ICT Curriculum No Yes Yes Yes Yes
development in skills development
clinical staff in clinical staff
training training
Seek accreditation Engagement Engagement No Yes Yes Yes Yes
for Health framework on framework
Informatics accreditation with
professionals with Namibian Health
the Namibian Profession Council
Health Profession developed
Council
modularised Curriculum / No Yes Yes Yes Yes
eHealth training NQA / NAHPC
curricula for
various type of
workers submitted
for approval by
NAHPC and NQA

Appendix 4: Indicative Costing Estimates
A draft indicative costing profile of Namibia’s National eHealth Strategy shows the annual
spending trajectory in the figure below.
Es9mated spending trajectory
100 000 000
80 000 000
60 000 000
40 000 000
20 000 000

1 2 3 4 5
Total cash outlay p.a. with escala9on Redeployed resources p.a. with escala9on
Total costs p.a. with escala9on
Figure 8: National eHealth Strategy estimated spending trajectory
Total estimated costs over the five years are approximately N$354m. This represents 2.36%
of the total health spend in Namibia (estimated at N$15bn per annum). Extra financial
requirements of over N$276m are 78% of the total costs is anticipated and redeployed
resources are estimated at about 22% (about N$78m) of the total.
Es9mated finance required
22%
Cash Outlay
Redeployed Resources
78%
Figure 9: National eHealth Strategy estimated finance required, including separation
between cash outlay and redeployed resources

ICT costs are estimated at N$256m, about 72% of the total costs. Organisational costs are
estimated at $98m, some 28%. This large proportion of ICT costs is attributed to the work
required to lift the baseline of the current ICT environment up, including establishing
infrastructure, software platforms, and interoperability frameworks. There is nevertheless a
substantial organisational complement to the estimated budget, almost a third, which includes
extra personnel, user engagement and an extensive training programme. These are all
essential for benefits realisation.
Es9mated distribu9on of costs
28%
ICT
Organisa9onal
72%
Figure 10: National eHealth Strategy estimated distribution of costs between ICT and
organisational costs
All estimates are adjusted for 5% annual inflation and are preliminary. They require a more
detailed assessment of activities in the Implementation Plan to arrive at a final budget figure.
The table below provides a breakdown of costing estimates for the National eHealth Strategy.
Note that where no budget is shown for a particular activity, this activity will be part of the
role fulfilled by personnel appointed under other activity items, particularly under the
Leadership and Governance Strategic Objective.
Table 18: eHealth strategy costing estimates (N$)
Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
Section 1: Cash Outlay
SO.1.1: Leadership Establish a National Develop and disseminate Terms of 40 000
and coordination of eHealth Steering Reference (TOR) for the National
the implementation Committee, chaired by the eHealth Steering Committee, invite
of the eHealth MoHSS Executive applications for membership
Strategy Director to oversee inter- candidates, and appoint members
strengthened by end sectoral coordination for
of 2021 successful implementation Develop an action plan for eHealth 40 000
of the eHealth strategy implementation at regional, district
and facility levels.

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
Establish a Secretariat and Conduct 400 000
regular committee engagements to
fulfil the TOR
Assign roles/responsibilities to the 5 000 000
existing positions within MoHSS and
create new positions for the effective
implementation of eHealth strategy
Develop SOP for the implementation 40 000
of eHealth strategy
Establish a National Establish the TOR, Structure and 40 000
eHealth Projects Office secure funding for a National eHealth
accountable to the eHealth Projects Office
Steering Committee,
staffed by fully seconded Second personnel from MoHSS and Redeployment of
officials, to drive the other government entities to staff the resources, see
implementation of the National eHealth Project Office Section 2 below
strategy, support the
Technical Working
Groups, and support
regional eHealth
implementation
Multiple eHealth Define and implement the structure, To be addressed by
implementation teams timelines and operations of the the National
from National eHealth central and regional eHealth eHealth Projects
Projects Office Implementation teams Office
Appoint/assign the eHealth 12 000 000
Implementation teams
Plus partial
resource
redeployment, see
Section 2 below
Establish strategic Develop and publish a Data To be addressed by
partnerships for the Governance framework for health the National
implementation of the information, in coordination with eHealth Projects
eHealth strategy relevant stakeholders Office
Implement a programme on health 505 000
promotion behaviour
Implement a programme of activities 185 000
to inform and sensitise health
professional communities and lead
the required changes in behaviour
and practices
SO.1.2: Develop the eHealth Establish different specialised 1 385 000
Collaborative, Technical Working Groups eHealth Standards Technical
integrated working (TWGs) required to Working Groups led by MoHSS

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
arrangements implement the eHealth
Establish MoUs with key To be addressed by
established in the plan, such as for Standards
stakeholders such as, Ministry of the National
oHSS by end of and Interoperability,
ICT, Home Affairs, Telecom and eHealth Projects
2021 Regulation, Stakeholder
others. Office
Engagement, Health
Information Systems and
Host an annual eHealth stakeholder 370 000
other
conference, supported by National
eHealth Steering Committee
SO.1.3: Manage Develop an effective, Identify the Change Management To be addressed by
change effectively comprehensive change Champions and develop a the National
from 2021 management plan comprehensive change management eHealth Projects
plan Office
Implement required Identify and define the roles of To be addressed by
change management change agents across all Directorates the National
processes to secure support and units in MOHSS to lead the eHealth Projects
from all stakeholders change management and Office
transformation plan
SO.1.4: eHealth net Implement an effective Present M&E milestones to the To be addressed by
benefits secured M&E framework for the National eHealth Steering Committee the National
through effective eHealth Strategy on a quarterly basis eHealth Projects
M&E of the strategy Office
from January 2021
Independent M&E unit Establish an Independent M&E unit 3 740 000
to oversee the eHealth Strategy and
Plus partial
Implementation plan
resource
redeployment, see
Section 2 below
SO. 2.1: Identify Establish an eHealth Develop an eHealth Impact 160 000
cost effective Impact framework and use framework and define the parameters
solutions and it to ensure that eHealth to make the investment case
sustainable systems achieve required
approaches for health system benefits,
implementation of sustainably
the eHealth strategy
attained by 2025 Assess all eHealth systems Conduct an impact assessment To be addressed by
prospectively, before containing among others the cost- the National
finances are allocated, to benefit analysis, publish this as eHealth Projects
ensure that net benefits are reference material and also as a Office
realised marketing tool
SO. 2.2: Mobilise Establish the investment Establish an investment committee to 185 000
sustainable long case to secure government facilitate sound management of
term resourcing, budget for eHealth strategy eHealth investments
including providing implementation
domestic funding Submit an investment case for the 160 000
and coordinating eHealth Strategy for National
international/donor Treasury and NPC to consider
contributions to addressing through voted funds and
eHealth strategy donor support

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
implementation by
Align private sector and Develop a standard Business Case 160 000

donor investment in the e- template for use by individual
Health strategy initiatives based on the Investment
Case modules
Develop expression of interest for To be addressed by
public/ private partnership to support the National
the implementation of specific eHealth Projects
eHealth Strategy business cases Office
Incorporate specific business cases
into donor application plans and
grant applications
Establish a long term Develop a long term plan to To be addressed by
approach for sustainable maintain, upgrade and improve the National
funding of eHealth eHealth systems beyond deployment eHealth Projects
initiatives beyond Office
deployment, to ensure
eHealth system
sustainability
Monitor the investment Submit regular reports on action
platform performance plans for discussion by the
investment committee
SO.2.3: Create a Establish an eHealth Develop eHealth research theme and 160 000
collaborative research and development concept note for NCRST and
research agenda with academic academic institutions to consider
environment for by institutions

SO.3.1: National Identify priority user Conduct a needs assessment, with 111 000
eHealth Platform requirements and identify extensive stakeholder engagement,
established by 2025 relevant applications to and publish findings
address these needs
Establish SOPs to guide software 160 000
application development processes
Identify and prioritise critical 160 000
applications to be developed
Establishment of a Develop and publish an over-arching 960 000
comprehensive and systems architecture to align systems
integrated eHealth development activities to the
management system priorities identified in the needs
inclusive of applications of assessment, which will be known as
medical financial the National eHealth Platform
administrative and legal
compliances Develop and publish policy To be addressed by
guidelines requiring all stakeholders the National
to align development activities to the eHealth Projects
National eHealth Platform systems Office
architecture

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
Evaluate existing software and 320 000
establish a roadmap for transitioning
them to the National eHealth
Platform architecture
Train key staff in PRINCE2 Project 185 000
management
Establish an in-house Develop a Project Charter and To be addressed by
electronic Patient establish a roadmap for developing the National
Information System and implementing an in-house eHealth Projects
electronic Patient Information Office
System
Evaluate existing software solutions
and establish a roadmap for
transitioning them to the electronic
Patient Information System roadmap
Implement the roadmap to achieve a 21 000 000
holistic patient-focused electronic
Patient Information System
(professional time)
Roll out the electronic Patient 7 370 000
Information System to all facilities
Plus partial
(implementers)
resource
redeployment, see
Section 2 below
Establish mechanisms to Develop a plan to ensure that all 240 000
prevent duplicate patients can access eHealth services.
notifications. Unique This includes providing for different
identification can be used methods of patient identification and
to address this (for patient enrolment using multiple
example, by issuing methods e.g. use of biometrics where
national identities; no national Identification cards are
possibly identification of not available
the parents, or any
identifier e.g. biometrics).
Principles of single source Define the policies and SOPs guiding To be addressed by
and single entry single source and single source entry the National
eHealth Projects
Office
Business process re- Develop and implement a 468 000
engineering comprehensive plan for Business
Process Re-engineering prior to
eHealth system development

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
SO.3.2: Patients' Establish a web-based Implement a mobile and/or web- 720 000
experience of care and/or Apps engagement based engagement tool to support the
improved by tool to support effective collaboration of
implementing implementation of the e- stakeholders and oversight of the
priority applications Health Strategy eHealth Strategy and its Strategic
by 2022 Objectives
Provide patients with access to key 960 000
information, such as appointments,
through a patient portal
Keep patients engaged via Notify patients about key information 720 000
notifications (e.g. SMS or (e.g. appointments, general health
in-app notifications) information) using existing electronic
communication channels
Develop a core suite of Establish a list of priority Apps and 6 480 000
modules, based on priority applications to be built and identify
user requirements, critical systems and build these apps
particularly the patientuser and clinical-user, that Invite relevant developers to develop 6 111 000
are all integrated and the Apps and applications aligned to
interoperable the National eHealth Platform and
national standards and
interoperability framework
SO.4.1: Health Establish a National Develop and publish a Normative 517 000
information standards and Standards Framework for all
availability and interoperability framework information systems, paper based and
sharing strengthened including the foundations eHealth initiatives that clearly defines
by 2022 of the unique identifier and SOPs for implementing new HIS,
incorporate international adapting existing HIS, HIS
standards like ICD11 and management and prioritise standards
HL7, FHIR etc. for data for critical systems
and information exchange,
aligned with the national Develop a proof of concept for 240 000
interoperability framework Unique ID approach and develop
national Unique Id strategy in line
with interoperability strategies
Design the interoperability Develop an interoperability 240 000
platform architecture for Namibia’s eHealth
initiatives
Design the technical approach to 517 000
deliver the interoperability
architecture
Implement the Secure the required human and 9 000 000
interoperability platform infrastructure resources needed to
Plus partial
build the National eHealth Platform
resource
redeployment, see
Section 2 below

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
Develop key interoperability 720 000
components of the eHealth Platform,
specifically prioritising: the API for
HIM, Master Patient index, Master
facility list, Data Warehouse,
National data dictionary and
minimum indicator set, and registries
Deploy and maintain the National 640 000
eHealth Platform
Publish interoperability Publish the national interoperability To be addressed by
artefacts for systems framework the National
developers to use eHealth Projects
Office
Establish electronic Master Establish electronic Master Patient 160 000
Patient Index (MPI) for Index (MPI) for use for the health
use for the health system system
Establish registries and Establish an electronic national 160 000
national data dictionaries facility register
Establish an electronic national data 160 000
dictionary for the minimum indicator
and data set
Establish an electronic national 480 000
health workforce register
SO.5.1: All users Connect health facilities in Establish a minimum specification To be addressed by
accessing eHealth the country with the for connectivity required by the the National
tools by end of 2024 minimum bandwidth MoHSS, detailing specifications for eHealth Projects
required for optimal access different types of facilities, and Office
to eHealth systems different types of users
Implement a regular update schedule
to update this specification according
to new applications emerging in the
Namibian eHealth environment,
including WIFI access for patients
Continued dialogue with the
telecommunications authorities to
support mobile and the case for
eHealth expansion for the last mile
and leveraging universal services
funds
Complete the rollout of national 100 000 000
connectivity to support the minimum
connectivity specification
Establish an effective and Identify the most appropriate server 80 000

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
secure operational hosting approach to meet the needs
environment for e-Health of National services and applications,
infrastructure, including and interoperability platform
strengthening the MoHSS
physical server hosting Develop a master configuration plan To be addressed by
environment for the server infrastructure approach the National
identified eHealth Projects
Office
Procure the appropriate infrastructure 4 880 000
and/or services for the server
infrastructure approach identified
Establish SOPs for all key systems 80 000
administration processes, including
user management, server
management, instance management,
and security
Develop policy document for all To be addressed by
systems administration processes, the National
aligned to the eHealth Strategy eHealth Projects
Office
Train all relevant stakeholders on 185 000
SOPs
Initiate a regular internal audit cycle To be addressed by
of all SOPs the National
eHealth Projects
Office
Provide health workers and Develop a minimum specification for To be addressed by
ICT workers with user devices fit for purpose (health the National
necessary equipment for workers, ICT workers) eHealth Projects
accessing information Office
Develop and implement a plan for 22 000 000
bringing devices up to the minimum
specification
Develop a policy on BYOD (health To be addressed by
workers, ICT workers, patients) the National
eHealth Projects
Develop a pro-active maintenance Office
and replacement plan for all devices,
including a plan for supply of
consumables, where appropriate
Establish registries and Establish an electronic national 160 000
national data dictionaries facility register
Establish an electronic national data 160 000
dictionary for the minimum indicator

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
and data set
Establish an electronic national 160 000
health workforce register
National eHealth Service Establish a National eHealth Service 2 240 000
Desk hosted in MoHSS Desk hosted in MoHSS
Plus partial
resource
redeployment, see
Section 2 below
SO.6.1: eHealth Review policies and laws Review eHealth strategy and identify 80 000
regulatory that govern eHealth in the priority regulatory aspects
framework country to produce a gap
strengthened by end analysis Identify appropriate regulatory To be addressed by
of 2024 process for each priority regulatory the National
aspect (Policy and/or Guideline eHealth Projects
and/or Legislation) Office
Draft regulatory documents in 320 000
consultation with stakeholders
Establish a roadmap for Establish a roadmap to address the To be addressed by
addressing the required gaps identified with legislation, the National
regulations policies, SOPs, guidelines eHealth Projects
Office
Publish regulations after processing
through appropriate channels
Publish specific policy and 80 000
regulations on cybersecurity, data
protection and local "home-grow"
solution development
Monitor compliance with Conduct regulatory compliance 320 000
the policies and laws testing on priority aspects, across all
implementers in Namibia
SO.7.1: Build Develop an integrated Engage with MoHSS management 185 000
capacity of MoHSS eHealth Human Capital and stakeholders to identify capacity
to implementation Development plan for development requirements and
team strengthened those managing and opportunities for the workforces
by 2021 leading the eHealth
Strategy, including aspects Develop and publish a 320 000
of conditions of service comprehensive human resources
and staff retention development plan for eHealth
Engage with partners to Consultations with partners to 185 000
support implementation of develop eHealth training strategies
the eHealth Human Capital
Development (HCD) plan Implementation of the workforce To be addressed by
strengthening plan the National
eHealth Projects
Office

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
Include the establishment of an 185 000
eHealth Leadership Development
programme
Implement the eHealth Engage with implementation 185 000
HCD plan for those stakeholders to identify requirements
managing and leading the and opportunities to support a
eHealth Strategy workforce strengthening plan
Create incentives for local ICT To be addressed by
organisations to recruit and retain the National
local ICT professionals to contribute eHealth Projects
to systems development and Office
maintenance for the eHealth Strategy
SO.7.2: Build Implement the eHealth Manage effective implementation of To be addressed by
capacity of all Human Capital the implementation workforce the National
categories of end Development plan for strengthening plan eHealth Projects
users (health those managing and Office
workers, leading the eHealth Improve human resource
administrators) to Strategy management system to encourage
effectively problem solving regarding use of
implement the eHealth solutions
eHealth Strategy by
2022 Develop eHealth skills retention
policy in consultation with
stakeholders
Train staff in the skills Partner with local higher education 185 000
required to use eHealth institutions and Niipam to conduct
systems staff training (health workers and
ICT workers)
Offer basic ICT training to existing 385 000
health workers through a local
institution
Implement on-job training and e- Redeployment of
Learning for currently employed resources, see
workforce, especially for Section 2 below
application/system specific training
Conduct Training-of-Trainers for 385 000
nursing and medical training staff on
eHealth strategy and ICT
Implement appropriate Conduct training needs analysis for Redeployment of
eHealth solutions that the existing workforce resources, see
respond to workforce Section 2 below
needs
Create user groups for the workforce 185 000
as a platform to learn, voice their
concerns and solve problems

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
S.O. 7.3: Build Develop an eHealth Collaborate with institutions of To be addressed by
capacity of training training curriculum for higher learning and other the National
institutions to different ICT workers and stakeholders to develop and/or adapt eHealth Projects
produce skilled health workers appropriate training programs Office
personnel that will
manage the eHealth Develop modularised eHealth
Strategy by 2025 training curricula for health workers
and ICT workers separately
Partner with local Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs) to develop the
Health Informatics curriculum
Integrate ICT skills Integrate ICT skills development in To be addressed by
development in clinical clinical staff training the National
staff training eHealth Projects
Office
Seek accreditation for Enter into a dialogue with the 74 000
Health Informatics Namibian Health Profession Council
professionals with the about accreditation
Namibian Health
Profession Council Submit the proposed modularised To be addressed by
eHealth training curricula for various the National
type of workers for approval by eHealth Projects
NAHPC and NQA Office
Section 2: Resources redeployed
SO.1.1: Leadership Establish a National Second personnel from MoHSS and 20 000 000
and coordination of eHealth Projects Office other government entities to staff the
the implementation accountable to the eHealth National eHealth Project Office
of the eHealth Steering Committee,
Strategy staffed by fully seconded
strengthened by end officials, to drive the
of 2021 implementation of the
strategy, support the Appoint/assign the eHealth 12 000 000
Technical Working Implementation teams
Groups, and support
regional eHealth
implementation
Independent M&E unit Establish an Independent M&E unit 3 740 000
to oversee the eHealth Strategy and
Implementation plan
SO.3.2: Patients' Roll out the electronic Patient 7 000 000
experience of care Information System to all facilities
improved by (implementers)
implementing
priority applications
by 2022

Strategic Objective Intervention Activity N$
SO.4.1: Health Implement the Secure the required human and 6 000 000
information interoperability platform infrastructure resources needed to
availability and build the National eHealth Platform
sharing strengthened
by 2022
SO.5.1: All users National eHealth Service Establish a National eHealth Service 11 000 000
accessing eHealth Desk hosted in MoHSS Desk hosted in MoHSS
tools by end of 2024
SO.7.2: Build Train staff in the skills Implement on-job training and e- 480 000
capacity of all required to use eHealth Learning for currently employed
categories of end systems workforce, especially for
users (health application/system specific training
workers,
administrators) to Implement appropriate Conduct training needs analysis for 560 000
effectively eHealth solutions that the existing workforce
implement the respond to workforce
eHealth Strategy by needs

277 168 000
Table 19: Adjustment for 5% inflation per annum (N$)
Item Before adjustment After adjustment
Cash outlay 216 388 000 276 172 015
Redeployed resources 60 780 000 77 572 393
277 168 000 353 744 408

Appendix 5: Alignment with Global Strategy
on Digital Health 2020-2025
This appendix provides analysis of alignment between the National eHealth Strategy of the
Republic of Namibia 2021-2025 and the Global Strategy on Digital Health 2020-2025. It is
an appendix to the National eHealth Strategy of the Republic of Namibia.
The Global Strategy on Digital Health responds to numerous resolutions of the United
Nations General Assembly, the World Health Assembly, and various World health
Organisation Regional Committees. These call for member states, regions and the global
community to develop digital health strategies that promote evidence-based digital health
interventions that will enable health systems strengthening for the benefit of all people in a
manner that is ethical, safe, secure, reliable, equitable and sustainable.
1. Alignment with Proposed Actions for Member States
There is considerable alignment between the two documents, despite the fact that the two
strategies are organised differently. This alignment is best demonstrated by comparing the
actions of the Namibian National eHealth Strategy Implementation Plan with the Global
Strategy’s Proposed Actions for Member States. The majority of proposed actions are
addressed substantively in the Namibian strategy.
Regarding the structure of the documents, the Global Strategy is organised around four main
strategic objectives:
- Promote global collaboration and advance the transfer of knowledge on digital health
- Advance the implementation of national digital health strategies
- Strengthen governance for digital health at global, regional and national levels
- Advocate people-centred health systems that are enabled by digital health.
The Namibian National eHealth Strategy follows the structure of the WHO/ITU National
eHealth Strategy Toolkit, which is arranged according to the following components:
- Leadership and governance
- Strategy and investment
- Software services and software applications
- Standards and interoperability
- eHealth infrastructure
- Legislation, policy and compliance
- Workforce.
The tables below list all the proposed actions for member states that are included in the
Global Strategy. For each action, relevant sections of the Namibian Strategy are provided
showing the extent to which the strategy addresses each proposed action, which strategic
objective addresses the item, and the target year for delivering each action.

Table 20: Alignment with Strategic Objective 1 of the Global Strategy
Strategic objective 1: Promote global collaboration and advance the transfer of knowledge on
digital health
Short-term (1-2 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Promote and participate in collaborations and Establish coordination structures and strategic
partnerships for sustainability of digital health to partnerships (SO.1.1: Leadership and coordination
accelerate adoption of the implementation of the eHealth Strategy
strengthened by end of 2021)
Identify and share information about gaps, Establish an eHealth research and development
priorities and resources needed for research in agenda with academic institutions (SO.2.3: Create
digital health a collaboration research environment by 2021)
Establish dedicated bodies and governance Establish a governance structure that includes a
mechanisms to prioritize and implement digital dedicated National eHealth Projects Office (SO.1.1:
health at national level including in times of Leadership and coordination of the implementation
emergency of the eHealth Strategy strengthened by end of
2021)
Participate in multistakeholder groups convened Establish eHealth Technical Working Groups
by the WHO Secretariat to support scaling up of (SO.1.2: Collaborative, integrated working
digital health and innovation at national level. arrangements established in the MoHSS by end of
2021)
Conduct a stakeholder analysis and identify Establish MoUs with key stakeholders such as
suitable actions to engage each group Ministry of ICT, Home Affairs, Telecom and others
contextualized to different public health situations (SO.1.2: Collaborative, integrated working
including preparedness and response. arrangements established in the MoHSS by end of
2021)
Identify Change Management Champions and
develop a comprehensive change management plan
(SO.1.3: Manage change effectively from 2021)
Conducting a needs assessment to identify priority
user requirements, with extensive stakeholder
engagement, and published findings in 2021
(SO.3.1: National eHealth Platform established by
2025)
Medium-term (2-4 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Establish centres of excellence or innovation hubs Establish a research and development agenda with
to assess and promote digital health solutions that academic institutions (SO.2.3: Create a
are aligned with country-defined needs collaboration research environment by 2021)
Participate in regional and global dedicated bodies Recognition of the importance of aligning with
and governance mechanisms to contribute to the global standards on eHealth practice and data
efforts in prioritizing digital health quality (Table 1. Guiding principles of eHealth in
Namibia)

Establish an appropriate and sustainable digital Develop an effective, comprehensive change
health ecosystem driven by sound common management plan that will identify the Change
principles contextualized to public health priorities Management Champions and develop a
and needs including with reference to emergencies comprehensive change management plan; and to
Implement required change management processes
to secure support from all stakeholders by
identifying and define the roles of change agents
(SO.1.3: Manage change effectively from 2021)
Ensure information sharing for measuring national Extensive activities to promote information sharing,
digital health maturity level (including information including establishing the Namibia e-Health
on digital health infrastructure, knowledge, Standards and Interoperability Framework which
technologies and use, etc.) in progress towards includes the foundations of the Unique Identifier
universal health coverage, healthier populations and incorporate international standards such as
and emergencies targets of the Sustainable ICD10, ICD 11 and HL7 which includes FHIR, etc.
Development Goals and WHO’s Thirteenth for data and information exchange (SO.4.1: Health
General Programme of Work, 2019–2023 information availability and sharing strengthened
by 2022)
Long-term (4-6 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Facilitate joint learning through communities of Develop eHealth training curricula for different
practice and curriculum-based training initiatives ICT workers and health workers, integrate ICT
to enhance country capacity on digital health skills development in clinical staff training, and to
seek accreditation for Health Informatics
professionals with the Health Professions Councils
of Namibia (HPCNA) (S.O. 7.3: Collaborate with
training institutions to produce skilled personnel
who will manage the eHealth Strategy by 2025)
Foster intersectoral and integrated engagement in The MoHSS has formed an eHealth Steering
digital health development across government, and Committee consisting of the Executive Director,
expand support on adopting and managing digital Deputy Executive Director and all Directors within
health solutions MoHSS as well as a HIS Technical Working
Committee consisting of various other ministries
and institutions. (Section on The Current State of
eHealth)
Table 21: Alignment with Strategic Objective 2 of the Global Strategy
Strategic objective 2: Advance implementation of national digital health strategies
Short-term (1-2 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Conduct a stakeholder analysis and identifying The Namibian strategy does not include a
suitable actions to engage each group stakeholder analysis of this kind.
contextualised to different public health situations
including preparedness and response
Conduct a comprehensive assessment of the This landscape assessment has been completed in
existing hardware and connectivity landscape in Namibia.
order to identify infrastructural needs and solutions

to drive digitalization
Establish well-informed and effective national Establish coordination structures and strategic
coordination mechanisms for governance of digital partnerships (SO.1.1: Leadership and coordination
health of the implementation of the eHealth Strategy
strengthened by end of 2021)
Develop (or ensure in place) a national digital The National eHealth Strategy 2021-2025 has been
health strategy or equivalent strategic framework completed.
Prioritize national investment in digital health in Establish the investment case to secure government
support of primary health care and universal health budget for eHealth strategy implementation in
coverage 2021. (SO. 2.2: Mobilise sustainable long-term
resourcing, including providing domestic funding
and coordinating international/donor contributions
to eHealth strategy implementation by 2025)
Involve stakeholders in the planning and Engage with partners/stakeholders to support
implementation of digital health, including implementation of the eHealth Human Capital
professional associations, patient and family Development (HCD) plan (SO.7.1: Human
organizations. Promote engagement with resource capacity of MoHSS to implement eHealth
communities, health-care workers and those in Strategy strengthened by 2022)
other sectors by identifying (1) champions to help
take advantage of and promote digital initiatives,
and (2) central and cross-sectoral governance
mechanisms for health-related innovations
Expand the digital health workforce and promote Conduct a training needs assessment for the
capacity-building to develop, update and workforce, and develop an integrated eHealth
implement national strategies and investment plans Human Capital Development plan for those
for digital health managing and leading the eHealth Strategy
(SO.7.1: Human resource capacity of MoHSS to
implement eHealth Strategy strengthened by 2022)
Implement an eHealth Human Capital Development
plan for those managing and leading the eHealth
Strategy (SO.7.2: Build capacity of all end user
categories (health workers, administrators) to
effectively implement the eHealth Strategy by 2023)
Implement management procedures for Develop a comprehensive change management
programmes, risks and change management plan, and implement required change management
processes to secure support from all stakeholders
(SO.1.3: Manage change effectively from 2021)
Develop a comprehensive plan for Business
Process Re-engineering prior to eHealth system
development by 2022 (SO.3.1: National eHealth
Platform established by 2025)
Review, develop, and/or revise specific laws and Review policies and laws that govern eHealth in the
policies, if necessary, with respect to data privacy, country to produce a gap analysis, establish a
security, confidentiality, standardization, roadmap for addressing the required regulations
exchange, accessibility and interoperability including specific policy and regulations on
cybersecurity, data protection and supporting local
"home-grown” solutions, and monitor compliance
with the policies and laws (SO.6.1: eHealth

regulatory framework strengthened by end of 2024)
Share good practices and lessons learned with The Namibian strategy does not include specific
other countries and the international community, actions on sharing good practices and lessons
through existing or new regional and global learned with the international community.
networks
Medium-term (2-4 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Mobilize adequate funding to support the cost of Establish a long-term approach for sustainable
acquisition or licensing, implementation and funding of eHealth initiatives beyond deployment,
maintenance of necessary hardware infrastructure, to ensure eHealth system sustainability in 2021; and
software, workforce capacity building and other align private sector and donor investment in the etechnical resources required Health strategy in 2022. (SO. 2.2: Mobilise
sustainable long-term resourcing, including
providing domestic funding and coordinating
international/donor contributions to eHealth
strategy implementation by 2025)
Develop and/or adapt a set of open health data Commitment to use open standards (Table 1:
standards to be used in digital health interventions, Guiding principles for eHealth in Namibia)
with a compliance and enforcement mechanism
Establish a national standards and interoperability
framework, including data and information
exchange (S.O.4.1: Health information availability
and sharing strengthened by 2022)
Enhance awareness of emerging or cutting- edge Emerging technologies are recognised, including:
digital health technologies and assess applicability mobile devices and the emergence of the Internet of
and use of these technologies Things (IoT); data science disciplines such as
advanced analytics, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML); emerging connectivity
technologies such as Television whitespace and 5G;
sensors to populate digital devices with data.
(Emerging opportunities for the implementation of
the eHealth Strategy)
Implement a regular update schedule to update this
specification according to new applications
emerging in the Namibian eHealth environment
(SO.5.1: All users accessing eHealth tools by end of
2024)
Promote national scientific, professional and Enter into a dialogue with the Health Professions
patient associations as active participants in the Councils of Namibian about accreditation,
national digital health development including to Seek accreditation for Health
Informatics professionals with the Health
Professions Councils of Namibia (S.O. 7.3:
Collaborate with training institutions to produce
skilled personnel who will manage the eHealth
Strategy by 2025)
Long-term (4-6 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia

Monitor the performance and progress of digital Monitor the investment platform performance in
health by adapting or using available tools or 2022. (SO. 2.2: Mobilise sustainable long-term
maturity model, including tools and training resourcing, including providing domestic funding
materials, on the status of development and and coordinating international/donor contributions
implementation progress of the digital health to eHealth strategy implementation by 2025)
strategy. Support the development and
Establishment of a comprehensive and integrated
implementation of a resilient national digital health
eHealth management system inclusive of
architecture blueprint, using known enterprise
applications of medical financial administrative and
architecture framework or methodology
legal compliances by 2022; and develop a
comprehensive plan for Business Process Reengineering prior to eHealth system development
by 2022 (SO.3.1: National eHealth Platform
established by 2025)
Establish and implement policies regarding Monetize eHealth System by 2024. (SO. 2.2:
practice, payment and accreditation for delivering Mobilise sustainable long-term resourcing,
integrated health services powered by digital including providing domestic funding and
solutions coordinating international/donor contributions to
eHealth strategy implementation by 2025)
Table 22: Alignment with Strategic Objective 3 of the Global Strategy
Strategic objective 3: Strengthen governance of digital health at global, regional and national levels
Short-term (1-2 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Analyse and document national start-ups working The Namibian strategy does not include activities
on innovative solutions to identify those that may relating to start-ups.
have a sustainable impact on health and well-being
Develop an implementation plan for digital health The strategy includes an implementation with
technologies in the context of health system specific items such as to establish an effective and
strengthening, health emergency response and secure operational environment for e-Health
healthy populations infrastructure by 2022 (SO.5.1: All users accessing
eHealth tools by end of 2024)
Implement appropriate eHealth solutions that
respond to workforce needs by 2022 (SO.7.2: Build
capacity of all end user categories (health workers,
administrators) to effectively implement the eHealth
Strategy by 2023)
Ensure the capacity of training institutions to Partner with local higher education institutions and
establish and/or expand digital health literacy, NIPAM to conduct staff training (health workers
provide life-long learning opportunities for digital and ICT workers) by 2022 (SO.7.2: Build capacity
health, and to have such digital health programmes of all end user categories (health workers,
properly accredited by the relevant authorities administrators) to effectively implement the eHealth
Strategy by 2023)
Medium-term (2-4 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Develop research and promote capacity-building Consultations with partners/stakeholders to develop

for governments, policy-makers, practitioners and eHealth training strategies; establish an eHealth
the public in general to take informed decisions, Leadership Development programme; and Create
generate trust and support digital health incentives for local ICT organisations to recruit and
investments retain local ICT professionals to contribute to
systems development and maintenance for the
eHealth Strategy (SO.7.1: Human resource
capacity of MoHSS to implement eHealth Strategy
strengthened by 2022)
Establish and develop capacity in using artificial The Namibian strategy does not address this item
intelligence and digital health medical devices directly.
under WHO's regulating, benchmarking or
certifying frameworks
Establish national data governance mechanisms, in Review policies and laws that govern eHealth in the
accordance with the development of regulatory country to produce a gap analysis by 2022; and
framework at global level establish a roadmap for addressing the required
regulations by 2024 (SO.6.1: eHealth regulatory
framework strengthened by end of 2024)
Develop capacity, according to country- specific Create incentives for local ICT organisations to
contexts, in planning for and using digital hospitals recruit and retain local ICT professionals to
and digital therapeutics, location-based services, contribute to systems development and
infodemic management during routine and maintenance for the eHealth Strategy (SO.7.1:
emergency health service delivery Human resource capacity of MoHSS to implement
eHealth Strategy strengthened by 2022)
Participate in global interoperability standards- Includes establish the Namibia e-Health Standards
setting processes for digital health led by WHO and Interoperability Framework which includes the
and comply with these standards foundations of the Unique Identifier and
incorporate international standards such as ICD10,
ICD 11 and HL7 which includes FHIR, etc. for data
and information exchange, and designing and
implementing an interoperability platform. (SO.4.1:
Health information availability and sharing
strengthened by 2022)
Analyse digital health ecosystem and propose Review policies and laws that govern eHealth in the
concrete policy actions to advance the achievement country to produce a gap analysis by 2022; and
of the targets of universal health coverage, the establish a roadmap for addressing the required
Sustainable Development Goals and WHO’s regulations by 2024 (SO.6.1: eHealth regulatory
Thirteenth General Programme of Work, 2019– framework strengthened by end of 2024)
2023 using digital health technologies
Develop an eHealth Technical Working Group
(TWG) on Regulation (SO.1.2: Collaborative,
integrated working arrangements established in the
MoHSS by end of 2021)
Long-term (4-6 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Develop target-product profiles and priority Establish a list of priority Apps and applications to
characteristics for digital health applications be built and identify critical systems, in order to
especially relevant to the needs of low- resource develop a core suite of modules, based on priority
settings; define challenges and draw a road map user requirements, particularly the patient-user and
for increased access to those products clinical-user, that are all integrated and

interoperable (SO.3.2: Patients' experience of care
improved by implementing priority applications by
2022)
Invest in and maximize the opportunities made Establish an eHealth Impact framework and use it
available by digital health technologies to to ensure that eHealth systems achieve required
strengthen capacity building of health workers in health system benefits, sustainably (SO. 2.1:
primary health care and public health emergency Identify cost effective solutions and sustainable
response approaches for implementation of the eHealth
strategy attained by 2025)
Establish the investment case to secure government
budget for eHealth strategy implementation (SO.
2.2. Mobilise sustainable long term resourcing,
including providing domestic funding and
coordinating international/donor contributions to
eHealth strategy implementation by 2025)
Table 23: Alignment with Strategic Objective 4 of the Global Strategy
Strategic objective 4: Advocate people-centred health systems that are enabled by digital health
Short-term (1-2 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Prioritize literacy through an accessible tool that Includes identifying priority user requirements and
enables understanding digital health technologies relevant applications to address these needs by
and systems 2022 (SO.3.1: National eHealth Platform
established by 2025)
Engage with professional organizations, patient This is partly addressed by the action to enter into a
associations and civil society organizations as dialogue with the Health Professions Councils of
active participants in digital health development Namibian about accreditation, including to Seek
and innovations accreditation for Health Informatics professionals
with the Health Professions Councils of Namibia
(S.O. 7.3: Collaborate with training institutions to
produce skilled personnel who will manage the
eHealth Strategy by 2025)
Strengthen public trust in digital health The Namibian strategy does not address this item
technologies and review the different education directly.
and training programmes on digital health by
institution, level of degree, specialty and cost, and
analyse current trends at the national level
Promote the use of population health management The Namibian strategy does not address this item
and gender-equality approaches through digital directly.
health applications to move health and well-being
from reactive care models to active communitybased models
Emphasize the role of the patient and enhance The Namibian strategy does not address this item
health care professionals’ understanding of the directly.
importance of activate patients in the patients’
treatment course

Medium-term (2-4 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Develop a digitally capable and gender- balanced Offer basic ICT training to existing health workers
health workforce through a local institution; implement on-job
training and e-Learning for currently employed
workforce, especially for application/system
specific training; and conduct Training-of-Trainers
for nursing and medical training staff on eHealth
strategy and ICT (SO.7.2: Build capacity of all end
user categories (health workers, administrators) to
effectively implement the eHealth Strategy by 2023)
Ensure competencies on digital health are included Collaborate with institutions of higher learning and
in the education and training curricula of all health other stakeholders to develop and/or adapt
professionals and allied workers, and at all levels appropriate training programs; and develop
of formal education and informal training modularised eHealth training curricula for health
workers and ICT workers separately; and partner
with local Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) to
develop the Health Informatics curriculum (S.O.
7.3: Collaborate with training institutions to
produce skilled personnel who will manage the
eHealth Strategy by 2025)
Developing population health management The Namibian strategy does not address this item
approaches through digital health solutions that directly.
move health and well-being from reactive care
models to active community- based models
Long-term (4-6 years)
Global Strategy on Digital Health National eHealth Strategy of Namibia
Develop capacity to allow individual feedback for Create user groups for the workforce as a platform
validating the performance of digital health tools to learn, voice their concerns and solve problems by
and services under a framework led by WHO 2022 (SO.7.2: Build capacity of all end user
categories (health workers, administrators) to
effectively implement the eHealth Strategy by 2023)
Ensure electronic patient health records are Establish a comprehensive and integrated eHealth
established management system inclusive of applications of
medical financial administrative and legal
compliances; establishing an in-house electronic
Patient Information System (SO.3.1: National
eHealth Platform established by 2025)
Develop a core suite of modules, based on priority
user requirements, particularly the patient-user and
clinical-user, that are all integrated and
interoperable (SO.3.2: Patients' experience of care
improved by implementing priority applications by
2022)
Foster digital health literacy at population level Establish a web-based and/or Apps engagement
and raise awareness of patients’ rights and the tool to support implementation of the e-Health
Strategy, and keeping patients engaged via

concept of dynamic consent notifications such as SMS or in-app notifications
(SO.3.2: Patients' experience of care improved by
implementing priority applications by 2022)
Ensure digital health solutions are informed by the Conduct needs assessments, with extensive
social determinants of health stakeholder engagement, with published findings,
to identify priority user requirements and identify
relevant applications to address these needs
(SO.3.1: National eHealth Platform established by
2025)
Develop capacity in personalized medicine The Namibian strategy does not address this item
directly.
Synthesize national research and disseminate Establish an eHealth Impact framework and use it
evidence on the contributions of digital health to ensure that eHealth systems achieve required
interventions to the performance of health systems health system benefits, sustainably (SO. 2.1:
and their impact on people’s health and well-being Identify cost effective solutions and sustainable
approaches for implementation of the eHealth
strategy attained by 2025)

Appendix 6: Digital Health Lessons From
COVID-19
There is probably no other public health situation quite like a pandemic to emphasise the
critical role of digital health in supporting timely decision making that saves lives. COVID19 has reminded the world of this point. Since COVID-19 appeared, National eHealth
Strategies have become more pertinent, and their realisation more urgent. The components of
an effective strategy are felt acutely during a pandemic. If interoperable systems are in place,
information flows in ways that support rapid responses. When those systems have not been
implemented their absence makes data difficult to manage and decisions hard to make
confidently.
This document summarises digital health lessons emerging from the COVID-19 experience
and identifies key implications for the National eHealth Strategy of the Republic of Namibia.
Experience during the COVID-19 pandemic has shown rapid uptake of digital health.xxiv xxv
Numerous digital initiatives are being utilised to help contain the virus, including tools for
services such as remote consultation,xxvi xxvii contact tracingxxviii and patient management.xxix
Countries existing efforts to improve connectivity and expand their digital economies have
also been heightened by COVID-19 experiences,xxx and opportunities for eHealth to support
health systems’ strengthening have been emphasised.xxxi The pandemic’s serious and
sustained challenges have accelerated digital transformation in many places.
All this has occurred against a backdrop of growing recognition for the role of digital health
in advancing Universal Health Coverage (UHC).xxxii The World Health Organization (WHO)
has been encouraging member states to adopt digital healthxxxiii across a wide range of
applications for more than a decade, including through the World Health Assembly and the
Regional Offices.xxxiv Health-strengthening capabilities of digital health are no longer
disputed and are deemed necessary to meet UHC objectives.
The pandemic has placed most countries’ health systems under strain. Not only do they
experience supply shortages, including of personal protective equipment (PPE) for frontline
health workers, other COVID-19 related factors increase pressures on the health system, such
as the increased mortality rate and deaths, mental health and substance abuse caused by
significantly changes to daily lives, and lifestyle changes, including reduced physical activity
levels that could prompt a resurgence of non-communicable diseases during or post COVID19.xxxv
The social impact of COVID-19 has also been significant, highlighted by socio-economic
issues precipitated by the closure of borders, supply disruptions, depreciation of currencies,
as well as dramatic scaling down of human and industrial activities,xxxvi increasing genderbased violence cases during lockdowns, and increased social unrest with continued travelling
restrictions and national lockdowns threatening lack of food supply and incomes.
These issues place unprecedented challenges on the health system, which require novel and
innovative solutions. Lessons from the pandemic thus far have shown that digital health can
help in a number of ways.

1. Digital Health Lessons
Since COVID-19 is likely to present further waves, and future pandemics are likely, health
care systems must continue to identify and apply lessons for strengthening. The value of
digital health tools is gained only when they are in place, emphasising that when a pandemic
hits it is too late to accelerate implementing actions of a national strategy, so keeping
implementation on track before the pandemic is important.
Emerging technologies offer further potential to help move health services forward more
rapidly than almost any other time in history with automation and intelligence. This heightens
the urgency to implement National eHealth’s Strategies, so that countries can begin to
experience the benefits of having access to the critical digital tools needed to respond
adequately to a pandemic. “With properly disaggregated health data, it is possible to plan
actions that reduce potential health inequities at all levels of care, and facilitate the
implementation of strategies to address such inequities.”xxxvii
The digital health lessons listed below demonstrate the complex interaction between people,
process and technology and show how addressing the challenges of COVID-19 requires our
digital health initiatives to embrace all three, supported by a comprehensive a national
strategy, in order to be successful.
Table 24: COVID-19 lessons for Namibia’s National eHealth Strategy
Strategic topic Lesson Implications for Namibia
Leadership and Pandemics help to focus attention on This will support the Minister’s
governance information issues and COVID has empowered existing efforts to invest in eHealth
ministries of health to take ownership of Digital for health systems strengthening
Health and invest in strengthening digital health
platforms
Quick decisions in complex and often contested Existing digital health governance
environments require clear decision making processes will be tested and
processes to follow strengthened
With many competing solutions appearing, The eHealth impact model
leadership and mechanisms for making optimal framework envisaged by MoHSS will
decisions are key to ensure appropriate help to promote making optimal
solutions are chosen for implementation decisions
The necessity to communicate forced There’s an opportunity for
stakeholders with disparate backgrounds and accelerating collaborative leadership,
interests, that previously would not normally strengthening cross-government,
engage can work productively towards a inter-departmental, holistic planning,
common goal. The demand for data is shared in advance, including contingency
across society thus inclusiveness and planning for management of intercommunity participation are essential. For departmental co-operation and
example, data usage agreements were fast process engineering, and engagement
tracked proving that it can be done; and the with all stakeholders to help remove
difficulties experienced with tracing contacts obstacles to accessing the
led to the development of the mobile app that information needed to make
allows citizens to receive information on decisions, while emphasising
whether they have been in close contact with a people’s rights to data protection.

Strategic topic Lesson Implications for Namibia
Covid case.
Organisations that create cross-functional data Existing stakeholder engagement
teams, collaborating with external partners, and efforts can be enhanced to strengthen
developing the right governance policies for a collaborative ecosystem of
how data can be used, have better success constructive use of information to
make better health systems decisions
Services and Ministries and organisations have been driven MoHSS will benefit from sharing
applications to innovative by to maximise available lessons learned with other countries
technologies such as chatbots, GIS tracking, in Africa and elsewhere
communication platforms, social media etc.
Use information systems that are already There is support for utilising existing,
known to users, since scenarios where new known solutions for Namibia’s
systems were implemented required much more COVID-19 response efforts
training and support than systems which were
known to the users. Pandemics are not the time
to introduce new systems. Systems like DHIS2
which is in use as country HMIS were able to
be implemented in multiple countries.
Chatbots move conversations along and there Chatbots create opportunities for
are several examples of organizations including Namibia to help address human
governments, employers, providers, and resource constraints; learning from
funders to use conversational technologies to experience in neighbouring countries
provide current information related to COVID- may be useful
19 to their citizens, employees, patients, and
beneficiaries. Ongoing research aims to
examine user conversations and how
conversations change over time during the
course of a pandemicxxxviii
There’s value in emerging data science, helping Incorporating data science modelling
to see things that are not easily seen with may yield benefits
conventional analysis, such as use modelling
tools to optimise distribution of critical medical
suppliesxxxix
Location services help track cases and optimise Geolocation functionality should be
resource planning, so include integration of added to systems requirements
Geographic Information System (GIS) specifications
technology into contact tracing apps for
monitoring migration patterns of patients and
contact-persons, mapping COVID-19 hotspots
and efficient allocation of resources in response
Rather than focusing on individual pilots with Flexible, scalable solutions should be
highly specific analytics tools, organizations prioritised
should adopt more flexible data solutions that
can be used in multiple areas and are highly
interoperable with other solutions, apply a
wider set of tools across a range of use cases
Enhance existing telemedicine services that Explore opportunities for expanding

Strategic topic Lesson Implications for Namibia
have already proven to be effective, since this existing telemedicine successes
will support social distancing and help optimise
resource allocations
Strategy and Not all of the individual data elements There are benefits to investing in
investment necessary to control a pandemic will be known building a culture and skills for dataearly on, but HCSs that have been investing in driven decision making
a strong data-driven culture and strategy will be
better positioned to be flexible and adjust their
analysis on critical patient outcome measures
Standards and Managing a pandemic needs lots of data from Developing a standards-based,
interoperability different sources. If it’s not already interoperable approach, and investing
interoperable, bringing it together becomes in it ahead of time will be
very challenging at the time when there’s not advantageous
time to waste.
Infrastructure Responding to a pandemic is easier with Namibia’s existing efforts to expand
accurate, real-time, purposeful data. Without connectivity will be reinforced
connectivity, it won’t flow.
Mobile solutions make data more widely Namibia’s high mobile penetration
available and facilitate the capturing of data by makes mobile-based solutions
a broader spectrum of users. There’s a need for appropriate for emphasising in the
a low-cost and adaptive contact tracing apps for digital solutions planned for
monitoring and tracing COVID-19 patients and pandemic response
close contacts while enforcing security and
privacy of health data.
Technology resources already in place can Overarching government
easily be appropriated or re-purposed to support infrastructure investments may pay
digital processes and procedures of a pandemic. dividends
Technology has proved an important tool to support local and regional governments on the
frontline of the emergency to provide essential public services during the COVID-19 crisis.
As the coronavirus continues to spread around the world, governments have put in place
important restrictions on the movement of people, the functioning of services, and rules on
physical distancing. Within this context, technology can help to maintain access to key health
services and information.
2. Practical Examples
2.1 Developed World
Researchers examined how six hospitals with a long history of health information technology
use have responded to the COVID-19 pandemic from an HIT perspective. They concluded
"Importantly, the HIT-related responses to COVID-19 were perceived to have further
highlighted the value of informaticians for improving care and responding quickly to
emergent needs".xl The study noted the following lessons:

- Manage time and resources to accommodate high patient volumes
- Streamlined governance processes to expedite responses to COVID-19 patients
- Streamlined workflows to reduce time taken to complete some systems related
processes, such as discharges
- Improved medication ordering practices as a response to initial shortages
- Systems interoperability for improved treatment accuracy and effectiveness
- Improved infection control
- Increased telehealth usage and capabilities, particularly for nonessential outpatient
appointments
- Utilizing specialised alerts
- Using technology to facilitate minimal-contact ward rounds, reducing the need for
personal protective equipment (PPE)
2.2 Southern Africa
In neighbouring South Africa, there are key COVID-19 lessons to share. One emphasised by
the Health Minister is the need to prepare a healthcare system that is able to provide UHC
demonstrating agility and the need to prepare for future pandemics. South Africa established
a National COVID-19 Command Council to take government-wide decisions, implementing
an adapted WHO COVID-19 strategy for containing and mitigating the spread of the virus.
The strategy included the creation of national and provincial incident management teams
(IMTs), which comprised of a variety of work streams, including governance and leadership;
medical supplies; port and environmental health; epidemiology and response; facility
readiness and case management; emergency medical services; information systems; risk
communication and community engagement; occupational health and safety and human
resources.
South Africa describes the most salient lessons learnt between March and September 2020 as:
- Strengthened command and control were achieved through both centralised and
decentralised IMTs
- Swift evidenced-based decision-making from the highest political levels for instituting
lockdowns to buy time to prepare the health system and increase health care capacity.
Nevertheless, although these strategies were successful, the stringent lockdown measures
resulted in economic hardship particularly for the most vulnerable sections of the population.
In the absence of a widely available vaccine to prevent the rapid spread of the virus, South
Africa focused on the following nonpharmaceutical interventions:xli
- Effective governance and leadership
- Strengthen surveillance and strategic information for active and informed use of
epidemiological data
- Augment health systems readiness including emergency medical services
- Enhance community engagement and risk communication to reduce spread, and
contact tracing and community screening
- Improve laboratory capacity and testing
- Clarify care pathways
- Scale-up infection prevention and control measures
- Boost capacity at ports of entry

- Expedite research and introduction of therapeutics, diagnostics and vaccines.
- Southern Africa
2.3 Personal Comments
Comments from two digital health experts help to illustrate these points.xlii
“From the wealthiest countries to the poorest, COVID-19, the disease caused by the
novel coronavirus has laid bare our common vulnerability to a threat we can’t see, an
enemy that is not ideological. And it has revealed that our most useful weapon can’t
be manufactured for profit or hoarded only for the few. Our most useful weapon is
accurate information based on high-quality data, plus sound governance to wield
those data for the good of all. Where data were available and used, lives have been
saved. Where absent, people have suffered in great and preventable numbers.”
- Manish Kumar of MEASURE Evaluation
“The capacity for a country’s health information systems to rapidly predict, identify,
test, treat, and monitor health outcomes among people infected with or exposed to
COVID-19, will be seen as the differentiator among country responses. So far, we
have seen that health information systems even in developed infrastructures in the
United States, Asia, and Europe were not yet able to perform all these functions.”
- Bobby Jefferson of DAI Global Health

References
i World Health Organization: Namibia. Available from https://www.who.int/countries/nam/en/
ii Namibia Statistics Agency. Namibia Inter-censal Demographic Survey 2016 Report. Available from
hii tNtpasm://icbmias S.mtayti.sntaic/ass Asegtse/ndcoyc.u Nmaemntisb/iNa IIDntSe_r-2c0e1n6s.apl dDf emographic Survey 2016 Report. Available from
https://cms.my.na/assets/documents/NIDS_2016.pdf
iii UNAIDS. 2019. Namibia. Available from http://aidsinfo.unaids.org
iv Ministry of Health and Social Services. 2018. Master Facilities List. Available from
https://mfl.mhss.gov.na/
v MOHSS. 2012. Assessment of National Health Information Systems: Ministry of Health and Social
Services, Republic of Namibia
vi Health Policy Project. 2016. Health Financing Profile: Namibia. Available from
https://www.healthpolicyproject.com/pubs/7887/Namibia_HFP.pdf
vii ITU. Statistics. Country ICT Data. Available from https://www.itu.int/en/ITUD/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
viii CRAN, 2019, Available from
https://www.cran.na/images/docs/economics/CRAN_Quarterly_Newsletter_Mar_2019.pdf
ix LelaOnline. 2018. MTC to erect 10 network towers in Kavango East and West.
Available from https://www.lelamobile.com/content/75483/MTC-to-erect-10-network-towers-inKavango-East-and-West/
x MoHSS Strategic Plan-2017/2018 – 2021/2022. Available from
http://www.mhss.gov.na/documents/119527/573553/MOHSS+Strategic+Plan+20172022.pdf/9d09e210-5f91-4c45-b7f6-79e3e134939a
xi Digital health 2018, World Health Assembly, 71: Geneva.
xii Global Strategy on Digital Health 2020-2025. 2020, World Health Organization: Geneva.
xiii National e-Health Strategy Toolkit. 2012, World Health Organization and International
Telecommunications Union: Geneva.
xiv What is health financing for universal coverage? Available from:
https://www.who.int/health_financing/universal_coverage_definition/en/
xv ITU. 2017. Digital Health Platform: Building a Digital Information Infrastructure (Infostructure) for
Health. International Telecommunications Union (ITU): Geneva.
xvi eHealth at WHO. Geneva: World Health Organization; [10 September 2019]; Available from:
https://www.who.i2017. nt/eHealth/about/en/.
xvii Scott RE, Mars M. Here We Go Again – ‘Digital Health’. J Int Soc Telemed eHealth. 2019.

xviii WHO. Digital Health. https://www.who.int/beHealthy/digital-health
xix WHO. Health Financing. Available from
http://origin.who.int/health_financing/universal_coverage_definition/en/
xx HIMSS. Interoperability in the health ecosystem. Available from https://www.himss.org/whatinteroperability
xxi Global Observatory for eHealth series. Available from https://www.who.int/goe/en/
xxii HL7. Available from https://www.hl7.org/
xxiii WHO. 2006. Electronic Health Records Manual for Developing Countries. Available from
http://www.wpro.who.int/publications/docs/EHRmanual.pdf
xxiv Auener S, Kroon D, Wackers E, et al. COVID-19: A Window of Opportunity for Positive
Healthcare Reforms. Int J Health Policy Manag 2020 2020/07/03. DOI: 10.34172/ijhpm.2020.66
xxv Digital Technologies and the COVID19 pandemic, Briefing & Learning Note. 15 April 2020 2020.
United Cities and Local Governments
xxvi Bokolo Anthony J. Use of Telemedicine and Virtual Care for Remote Treatment in Response to
COVID-19 Pandemic. J Med Syst 2020; 44: 132. 2020/06/17. DOI: 10.1007/s10916-020-01596-5
xxvii Mann DM, Chen J, Chunara R, et al. COVID-19 transforms health care through telemedicine:
Evidence from the field. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020; 27: 1132-1135. 2020/04/24. DOI:
10.1093/jamia/ocaa072
xxviii Ekong I, Chukwu E and Chukwu M. COVID-19 Mobile Positioning Data Contact Tracing and
Patient Privacy Regulations: Exploratory Search of Global Response Strategies and the Use of Digital
Tools in Nigeria. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020; 8: e19139. 2020/04/21. DOI: 10.2196/19139
xxix Alwashmi MF. The Use of Digital Health in the Detection and Management of COVID-19. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 2020; 17 2020/04/29. DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17082906.
xxx State of Broadband Report. 2020. Geneva: International Telecommunication Union and United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
xxxi Auener S, Kroon D, Wackers E, et al. COVID-19: A Window of Opportunity for Positive
Healthcare Reforms. Int J Health Policy Manag 2020 2020/07/03. DOI: 10.34172/ijhpm.2020.66.
xxxii Olu O, Muneene D, Bataringaya JE, et al. How Can Digital Health Technologies Contribute to
Sustainable Attainment of Universal Health Coverage in Africa? A Perspective. Front Public Health
2019; 7: 341. 2019/12/06. DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00341
xxxiii Digital Health. In: Seventy-first World Health Assembly Geneva, 26 May 2018 World Health
Organization
xxxiv Utilizing eHealth Solutions to Improve National Health Systems in the African Region,
AFR/RC63/9. 19 June 2013 2013. Brazzaville: World Health Organization, Regional Office for
Africa

xxxv Singh AK and Misra A. Impact of COVID-19 and comorbidities on health and economics: Focus
on developing countries and India. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2020; 14: 1625-1630. 2020/09/06. DOI:
10.1016/j.dsx.2020.08.032
xxxvi Lone SA and Ahmad A. COVID-19 pandemic - an African perspective. Emerg Microbes Infect
2020; 9: 1300-1308. 2020/05/28. DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2020.1775132
xxxvii COVID-19 and the importance of strengthening Information Systems. Pan American Health
Organization, 2020
xxxviii McKillop M, South BR, Preininger A, et al. Leveraging conversational technology to answer
common COVID-19 questions. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2021; 28: 850-855. 2021/02/01. DOI:
10.1093/jamia/ocaa316.
xxxix Bednarski BP, Singh AD and Jones WM. On collaborative reinforcement learning to optimize the
redistribution of critical medical supplies throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. J Am Med Inform
Assoc 2021; 28: 874-878. 2020/12/10. DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa324.
xl Malden S, Heeney C, Bates DW, et al. Utilizing health information technology in the treatment and
management of patients during the COVID-19 pandemic: lessons from international case study sites.
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2021 2021/03/14. DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocab057
xli Moonasar D, Pillay A, Leonard E, et al. COVID-19: lessons and experiences from South Africa's
first surge. BMJ Glob Health 2021; 6 2021/02/26. DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2020-004393
xlii COVID-19: This pandemic offers a lesson we must learn before the next,
https://sciencespeaksblog.org/2020/04/14/covid-19-this-pandemic-offers-a-lesson-we-must-learnbefore-the-next/ (2020, accessed 23 April 2021)