The process of developing Benin’s National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy
(SNIAM) was headed up by the Ministry of Digital Affairs and Digitalization, in an approach
involving all the stakeholders and following a holistic approach focused on technological
solutions suited specifically to our country’s needs, particularly in the fields of education,
healthcare, agriculture, living conditions, tourism, and on the understanding of the use
cases applicable to the Beninese context. The SNIAM was adopted by the Ministerial
Council in its session of January 18, 2023.
Guided by the vision of establishing a 2027 target for making Benin a country that can
boast, amongst other things, the use of its big data by means of artificial intelligence
systems and technologies and the development of the associated skills, it comprises four
programs that can be rolled out in three phases spread over five years, with a portfolio
containing one hundred and twenty-three (123) actions impacting both the public and
the private sectors.
The adoption of this strategy positions Benin as a country capable of seizing current
and future opportunities related to artificial intelligence and the processing of big data,
making it even more attractive for all types of investments, especially from the private
sector and development partners.

CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES ..................................................................................................................4
LIST OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................4
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ..............................................................5
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................8
BACKGROUND .......................................................................................................................................9
RATIONALE AND AMBITIONS .......................................................................................................9
1. FORMULATION OF THE STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK ...........................................10
1.1. FOUNDATION AND PRINCIPLES ...................................................................................11
1.2. VISION ..........................................................................................................................................13
1.3. THEORY OF CHANGE ..........................................................................................................13
1.4. STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS, STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PROGRAMS .......
........................................................................................................................................................................15
2. PROGRAMMATIC FRAMEWORK .............................................................................20
2.1. COHERENCE TABLE BETWEEN THE STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK AND THE
PROGRAMMATIC FRAMEWORK ................................................................................................21
2.2. ACTION PLAN .........................................................................................................................23
3. FINANCING AND RESOURCE MOBILIZATION MECHANISM .............................39
3.1. FINANCING MECHANISM ................................................................................................40
3.2. RESOURCE MOBILIZATION FOR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION .............40
4. IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES .............................................................................41
4.1. IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM ................................................................................42
4.2. MECANISMES D’EVALUATION ......................................................................................44
4.3. ACTIVITIES AND PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT FRAMEWORK ..........44
4.4. ACCOMPANYING MEASURES ........................................................................................45
4.5. RISK ANALYSIS AND CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESS ...........................................45
5. CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................46
6. APPENDICES .................................................................................................................49
6.1. APPENDIX 1 : REFERENCES .............................................................................................50
6.2. APPENDIX 2: LISTS OF USE CASES ..............................................................................51
6.3. APPENDIX 3: IA AS A SERVICE .......................................................................................63
6.4. APPENDIX 4: COLLECTION AND PROCESSING CHAIN ...................................66
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 3

LIST OF TABLES
Table 9 : Table showing coherence between strategic guidelines and objectives .............................15
Table 10 : Programmatic framework ..................................................................................................................................22
Table 14 : Supporting measures ..........................................................................................................................................45
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 5 : Theory of Change ...........................................................................................................................................14
Figure 6 : Principle of the collection and processing chain ....................................................................36
Figure 7 : Block diagram of the big data management system .................................................37
4 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ACE Africa Coast to Europe
ADN Agence du Développement du Numérique
AFNOR L’Association Française de Normalisation
AIDP Analyse d’impact relative à la protection des Data
ANIP Agence Nationale d’Identification des Personnes
ANSI American National Standards Institute
ANSSI Agence Nationale de la Sécurité des Systèmes d’Information
APDP Autorité de Protection des Data à caractère Personnel
ASSI Agence des Services et Systèmes d’Information
ASIN Agence des Systèmes d’Information et du Numérique
BAD Banque Africaine de Développement
BCEAO Banque Centrale des États de l’Afrique de l’Ouest
CEDEAO Communauté Economique des Etats de l’Afrique de l’Ouest
CNSR Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale
CNUCED Conférence des Nations Unies sur le Commerce et le Développement
CTA Centre Technique de Coopération Agricole et Rurale
DCN Data Center National
DGI Direction Générale des Impôts
DHIS District Health Information Software
DMIA Délégation Interministérielle de l’Intelligence Artificielle
AIPD Analyse d’Impact pour la Protection des Data
FAEN Fonds d’Appui à l’Entrepreneuriat Numérique
FAI Fournisseur d’Accès Internet
FAO Organisation pour l’Alimentation et l’Agriculture
FMI Fonds Monétaire International
GIZ Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GPAI Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence
IA Intelligence Artificielle
IDI Indice de Développement des TIC
IFRI Institut de Formation et de Recherche en Informatique
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 5

IFU Identifiant Fiscal Unique
IMSP Institut Supérieur de Mathématiques et de Sciences Physiques
INRAB Institut de Recherche d’Agronomie Béninoise
INSAE Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Économique
IP Internet Protocol
LEARN Levier d’Apprentissage pour la Reconversion dans le Numérique
LOLF Loi Organique relative à la Loi de Finances
MCC Millennium Challenge Corporation
MEF Ministère de l’Economie et des Finances
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
NIP Numéro d’Identification Personnel
NRI Network Readiness Index
Organisation de coopération et de développement économique
OCDE
OCP Office Chérifien des Phosphates
OCRC Office Central de Répression de la Cybercriminalité
ODD Objectifs De Développement Durable
PAC Port Autonome de Cotonou
PAG Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement
Projet de Développement des Infrastructures de Télécommunications et des TIC
PDI2T
PIB Produit Intérieur Brut
PKI Public Key Infrastructure
PME Petites et Moyennes Entreprises
PND Plan National de Développement
PNDS Plan National de Développement Sanitaire
PNPE Plateforme Nationale De Paiement Électronique
PPD Principes de Protection des Data
Programme de Renforcement des Structures Centrales de Gouvernance
PRSCG
QW QuickWin
6 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Recensement Administratif à Vocation d’Identification de la Population
RAVIP
RBER Réseau Béninois d’Education et de Recherche
RNA Réseau National de l’Administration
R&D Recherche et Développement
SAT3 South Africa Transit 3
SBEE Société Béninoise d’Energie Electrique
SBIN Société Béninoise d’Infrastructures Numériques
SIGFIP Système Intégré de Gestion des Finances Publiques
SIGTAS Système Intégré de Gestion des Taxes et Assimilés
SIRB Société des Infrastructures Routières du Bénin
SNAN Stratégie Nationale d’Agriculture Numérique du Bénin
Stratégie Nationale d’Intelligence Artificielle et des MégaData
SNIAM
SOC Security Operation Center
SONEB Société Nationale des Eaux du Bénin
TVM Taxe sur Véhicule à Moteur
UE Union Européenne
UEMOA Union Economique et Monétaire Ouest Africaine
WACREN West and Central African Research and Education Network
XML Extensible Markup Language
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 7

88 NStaratitoéngaiel A Nratitfiiocniaal lIen tde’Ilnligteelnligcee nacned A Britgifi Dciaetlale S ettr adteesg My é2g0a2D3 a- t2a0 227023 - 2027

OVERVIEW
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become a field of strategic importance that
can represent a major driver of economic development, as well as a lever for
strategic positioning, both regional and international, with multiple sectorspecific opportunities.
As such, AI is an issue of key importance for national development policies in
terms of its implications for regulation, the digital economy, human capital,
training, research, cooperation and innovation.
RATIONALE AND AMBITIONS
In order to make the most of its potential and bolster the various initiatives in
this field that are already in the making, Benin needs to, first of all, establish
its strengths in this area, and second of all, define its objectives with a view
to the effective use of Artificial Intelligence for the benefit of its population.
To this end, it is also necessary to establish the resources that the country will
have to procure if it is to facilitate the implementation of an AI ecosystem, and
in so doing, cement itself as the leader in certain strategic areas for the West
African subregion.
Benin has a suitable institutional and legal framework (the Code of Digital
Affairs, adopted on June 13, 2017, as amended by Law No. 2020-35 of January
6, 2021) as well as a dynamic digital ecosystem which, combined, constitute
an essential foundation for the development of a solid Artificial Intelligence
strategy capable of offering concrete solutions to development problems in a
multitude of areas (agriculture, healthcare, tourism, education, transportation,
security, e-governance, e-business, etc.).
In short, a well thought-out national strategy for the development of Artificial
Intelligence will contribute to the efforts made by the digital economy sector
to meet the objectives of the sector-specific policy, namely to make Benin the
leading platform for digital services in West Africa.
In order to most effectively exploit the benefits that AI can offer in the target
areas for development, and to position the country as a major player in AI in
West Africa, the Ministry of Digital Affairs and Digitalization has developed this
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy.
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 9

1. FORMULATION OF THE
STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK
1100 NStaratitoéngaiel A Nratitfiiocniaal lIen tde’Ilnligteelnligcee nacned A Britgifi Dciaetlale S ettr adteesg My é2g0a2D3 a- t2a0 227023 - 2027

1.1. FOUNDATION AND PRINCIPLES
1.1.1. FOUNDATION
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2018-2025
Benin’s National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy is rooted in the
National Development Plan 2018-2025 (NDP).
The NDP shows that the strategic sectors with the highest potential are
agribusiness and services, which include Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT). According to the results of the strategic analysis carried out
in the context of the NDP : Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT): insufficiently developed and with poor availability.
What’s more, the strategic option adopted under the NDP is to : make
agribusiness, services and tourism the drivers for strong, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth within the framework of more effective national
and local governance, achievable by focusing on the development of human
capital and infrastructure.
The development of digital technology in general and, more specifically, artificial
intelligence forms part of a three-step (3) implementation plan under the NDP:
First step: the diversification of agricultural production, as supported by the
development of services.
Second step: the transformation of agribusiness and the increased
development of services.
Third step: the exportation of knowledge through innovation and
biotechnology.
GOVERNMENT ACTION PROGRAM (GAP) 2021-2026
Much like the NDP, the second pillar of the GAP identifies digital technology
as a lever for accelerating the structural transformation of Benin’s economy.
NATIONAL SECTORAL STRATEGIES
The Sectoral Policy Declaration for the digital economy sector expressed
Benin’s ambitions as follows: For Benin to become the leader in the ICT sector
in West Africa and to be ranked in the top 100 of the Network Readiness Index
(NRI), with this to be achieved by transforming Benin into West Africa’s go-to
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 11

digital services platform for accelerated growth and social inclusion.
The blossoming of the ecosystem resulting from the implementation of this
strategy should boost Benin’s positioning as a digital services platform.
Benin’s National Digital Agriculture Strategy (SNAN-Benin 2021-2025)
established the following vision: A better-performing agricultural sector by 2025,
made possible through the use of digital solutions, with the following strategic
guidelines :
Improving the productivity of agricultural sectors.
Improving the reliability of the information system in the sector.
Improving the governance and management mechanisms for the sector.
Developing the capacities of all the actors in the management of the
agricultural sector.
Artificial intelligence is a major lever in the implementation of this strategy,
above all for the areas relating to smart agriculture.
The National e-Health Strategy 2018-2022 has adopted the following vision: by
2022, Benin’s healthcare system will offer better healthcare to all its citizens
by removing all barriers of quality, fairness, equality, accessibility, availability
and speed by means of the contribution of e-health, with the mission of using
ICT at all levels of the healthcare system to make reliable health and medical
information available, improve the quality of care, and make the management
of resources in the country’s healthcare facilities more efficient.
In terms of security, one project established under the GAP 2021-2026 concerns
developing video surveillance, which can draw heavily on the capabilities of AI.
1.1.2. PRINCIPLES
The construction and implementation of the strategy is guided by a number of
key principles which are universally recognized as contributors to the success of
development strategies. These are:
Iterative and incremental implementation : this principle allows for rapid
operationalization, at the outset, for identified use cases and high-impact
initiatives. At a later stage, depending on the results of this initial rollout, it will
then be possible to proceed to an increased production of services within an
updated regulatory framework.
Resource pooling : for all sectors and as far as possible, the beneficiaries should
have access to the entire institutional and organizational system and technical
solutions resulting from the strategy.
Accountability : this principle goes hand in hand with the principle of the
effective participation of the various stakeholders in the actions that make up
the strategy. In order to achieve this, all stakeholders - namely the government,
12 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

the private sector, and the end users - will need to be involved in the design,
implementation, and ongoing monitoring and evaluation of the strategy. This
principle includes mutual accountability between duty bearers (State, Local
Government, Private Sector Leaders, Civil Society Leaders) and rights holders
(the general public and other specific beneficiaries).
Results-based management : this has become a crucial managerial approach
in guiding planning, implementation, reporting and evaluation in all
organizations. It focuses on achievements rather than activities, and as such
requires clear objectives, indicators and targets to be established. This principle
will be systematized at all stages of the strategy’s planning, implementation,
and ongoing monitoring and evaluation process.
1.2. VISION
The vision was formulated by taking into account the strategic analysis carried
out, along with the challenges, issues and problems at hand. It is worded as
follows:
By 2027, Benin should enjoy a high profile thanks to artificial intelligence,
which is a lever for the growth of strategic sectors, as applied in an
opportunistic approach.
This strategy should help to make this vision a reality over the next five (5) years.
1.3. THEORY OF CHANGE
SHORT-TERM CHANGE
The short-term change will consist of the effects of the transformations resulting
from guideline 1 (step 1). The changes to be expected in the short term are:
Rollout of the identified use cases and gradual resolution of the associated
issues;
The human capabilities of the actors as regards AI and big data management
being strengthened.
MEDIUM-TERM CHANGE
The medium-term change will consist of the effects of the transformations
resulting from guideline 2 (step 2). The changes to be expected in the medium
term are:
The identified issues being entirely resolved;
Big data being effectively managed;
The rollout taking place in a controlled environment, pending the
implementation of the relevant regulatory framework;
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 13

Ethical and liability issues related to AI being under control;
Actors such as the IMSP, the IFRI, Sèmè City, startups and certain bodies
being supported with regard to their AI needs;
Human capital being developed in the field of AI.
LONG-TERM CHANGE
The long-term change will consist of the effects of the transformations resulting
from guideline 3 (step 3). The changes to be expected in the long term are:
The AI sector in Benin being governed, educated and led by Beninese
companies;
Productivity and the quality of products and services in the business sectors
being improved;
Technology and knowledge transfer taking place between research
laboratories and the private sector;
Benin becoming a well-known country in the field of AI and its leadership within
the subregion being cemented.
FIGURE 5: THEORY OF CHANGE
14 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

1.4. STRATEGIC GUIDELINES, STRATEGIC
OBJECTIVES AND PROGRAMS
1.4.1. STRATEGIC GUIDELINES
The vision put forward will be implemented progressively and incrementally
through the following strategic guidelines:
Strategic Guideline 1: Organization and consolidation of the existing fledgling
ecosystem and exploitation of its results;
Strategic Guideline 2: Further development and support of the AI ecosystem;
Strategic Guideline 3: Increased value of Benin’s ecosystem, knowledge and
expertise.
STRATEGIC GUIDELINE 1 : Organization and consolidation of the
existing fledgling ecosystem and exploitation of its results
In the field of research, AI innovation and cooperation, there is strong momentum
despite the insufficient support being provided.
The first stage of implementing the strategy will involve organizing and
consolidating these assets, specifically by applying (testing out/experimenting
with) the following ad-hoc or planned (large-scale) actions :
Implement the previously-identified initiatives and use cases;
Establish a controlled environment by applying the articles of the Code of
Digital Affairs (406, 407, 408) which would allow for the rigor of preliminary
formalities to be eased;
Establish and roll out a training and awareness program for all stakeholders.
This first step requires connectivity, storage and data processing infrastructure
to be available for us (computing power, supercomputers, etc.). Failing this, the
cloud can be used within the limits allowed by the regulations.
STRATEGIC GUIDELINE 2 : Further development and support of
the AI ecosystem
In parallel with the consolidation and improvement of the existing setup, the
strategy will involve building a solid and sustainable ecosystem with an agile
approach (by adjusting the relevant actions and measures) based on the lessons
learned during the previous step.
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 15

In order to achieve this, transformation projects will be undertaken along the
following lines:
Provide support to institutional actors such as the IMSP, the IFRI and Sèmè
City, as well as private sector actors and startups, in rolling out value-added
solutions;
Develop human capital;
Carry out technology and knowledge transfer to ensure a strong link between
research laboratories and the private sector;
Adapt the legal and regulatory framework to suit the new demands of AI
(Liability, Ethics, etc.)
STRATEGIC GUIDELINE 3 : Increased value of Benin’s ecosystem,
knowledge and expertise
Successful completion of the first two steps should help to establish Benin’s
renown and attractiveness in the field of AI, allowing for its results and expertise
in AI to be leveraged and exported.
1.4.2. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
TABLE 9 : TABLE SHOWING COHERENCE BETWEEN STRATEGIC GUIDELINES AND
OBJECTIVES
Strategic Guidelines Strategic Objectives Line of Action Proposed Programs
Strategic Guideline 1 : Program 1 :
Organization and Strategic Objective 1 : Development and
Service and data
consolidation of the existing Implement high-impact implementation
infrastructure
fledgling ecosystem and initiatives and use cases of high-impact AI
exploitation of its results solutions
Strategic Objective 2 : Program 3 :
Strategic Guideline 2 : Strengthen human Strengthen human
Further development and capabilities in terms Human capital capabilities of actors
support of the AI ecosystem of AI and big data in AI professions and
management positions
Strategic Objective 3 :
Program 3 :
Strategic Guideline 3 : Provide better support
Research, Support for training,
Increased value of Benin’s for research, innovation,
innovation and research, innovation,
ecosystem, knowledge and the private sector and
partnership the private sector and
expertise cooperation in the field
cooperation
of AI
Strategic Objective 4 : Program 4 :
Strategic Guideline 2 : Update the institutional Implementation of
Further development and and regulatory Governance governance framework
support of the AI ecosystem framework for AI and big for AI and big data
data management management
16 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1 : Implement high-impact initiatives and
use cases
The assessment of the current situation showed that there are multiple AI
initiatives and that AI can offer solutions to a great many issues faced by the
priority sectors covered by the research.
The first stage of the iterative (and incremental) approach to rolling out this
strategy consists of the actual implementation of AI initiatives and solutions. To
this end, the top priority should be to scale up the existing initiatives.
This objective should allow for the high-impact AI initiatives to succeed, all whilst
proving the National Data Center’s ability to support the development of AI
solutions.
Specific objectives
In order to achieve this strategic objective, the following specific objectives have
been established :
Implement components in the data center such as Data-Lake-as-a-Service,
ML-as-a-Service, etc.;
Rollout (Definition and planning, drawing up specifications, selecting service
providers, execution, change management and deployment) of AI solutions.
Expected effects
The expected effects of this strategic objective is to resolve the identified issues
through the implementation of AI solutions.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2 : Renforcer les capacités humaines sur
l’IA et la gestion des mégaData
The inadequacy of human capital is the main factor holding back the emergence
of an AI ecosystem in Benin. Addressing this will require not only training and
having access to the necessary skills, but also educating all actors (public, private,
civil society and end users) in the ecosystem about digital tools and AI.
Specific objectives
In order to achieve this strategic objective, the following specific objectives have
been established :
Training in the field of AI and Data Science;
Strengthen human capabilities in terms of AI;
Strengthen human capabilities in terms of big data management.
Expected effects
The expected effects of this strategic objective are :
Basic training, specific programming training, and ongoing training courses
being provided in institutions;
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 17

Actors (both public and private) as well as end users being educated and
trained in AI;
Actors (both public and private) as well as end users being educated and
trained in big data management.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3 : Provide better support for the
development of human capital, research, innovation, the private
sector and cooperation in the field of AI
Research, innovation and the private sector are important components for any
AI ecosystem to flourish.
Providing answers to bolster the support provided to this sector is essential to
the success of AI in Benin.
Specific objectives
In order to achieve this strategic objective, the following specific objectives have
been established:
Support training and research;
Develop sustainable funding mechanisms for research and innovation;
Bolster subregional and international cooperation.
Expected effects
The expected effects of this strategic objective are :
Research centers becoming productive and attractive at both subregion and
international levels;
The transfer of research results between research laboratories and the private
sector being ensured;
The productivity and quality of products (or new products) in strategic, highpotential sectors being improved;
Benin becoming a well-known actor in the field of AI and its leadership within
the subregion being cemented.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4 : Update the institutional and regulatory
framework for AI and big data management
The assessment of the current situation highlighted a lack of oversight for AI
solutions and the need to address the ethical and liability issues related to using
AI.
It also brought up the need for the proper management of big data, which is the
raw material used for AI solutions.
This strategic objective should allow for:
Legislation regulating the relevant ethical and liability issues to be adopted;
A big data management system to be implemented.
18 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Specific objectives
In order to achieve this strategic objective, the following specific objectives have
been established :
Adopt legislation regulating AI in Benin;
Establish a controlled environment for the development of AI initiatives;
Define and roll out a big data management model.
Expected effects
The expected effects of this strategic objective are:
Ethical and liability issues being under control;
Activities in the field of AI being implemented in a coordinated fashion by the
actors involved;
High-quality data becoming available in large quantities.
TABLE SHOWING COHERENCE BETWEEN MAJOR ISSUES AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Problèmes majeurs Objectifs stratégiques
Strategic Objective 1 : Implement high-impact
initiatives and use cases
The ecosystem is not aware of the benefits of
AI Objectif stratégique 2 : Strengthen human
capabilities in terms of AI and big data
management
Institutional support is not sufficient for AI
research and startups Strategic Objective 3 : Provide better support
for research, innovation, the private sector and
Insufficient sectoral funding for AI research cooperation in the field of AI
and startups
Strategic Objective 2 : Strengthen capabilities
Insufficient resources trained in the field of AI and educate people on AI and big data
management
Ethical and liability issues related to AI not
being addressed by the legal framework Strategic Objective 4 : Update the institutional
and regulatory framework for AI and big data
management
Lack of a framework for big data
management
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 19

PROGRAMMATIC
FRAMEWORK
20 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

2.1. TABLE SHOWING COHERENCE
BETWEEN THE STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK
AND THE PROGRAMMATIC FRAMEWORK
In total, four (4) programs have been drawn up for the implementation of the
strategic objectives of the National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy:
PROGRAM 1
Development and opportunistic
implementation of AI solutions
in high-priority sectors
PROGRAM 2
Strengthening human
capabilities of actors in AI
professions and positions
PROGRAM 3
Support for training, research,
innovation, the private sector
and cooperation
PROGRAM 4
Implementation of governance
framework for AI and big data
management
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 21

TABLE 10: PROGRAMMATIC FRAMEWORK
Overall Objectives of the
Programs Specific objectives
Programs
- Implement components
in the data center such as
Data-Lake-as-a-Service,
ML-as-a-Service, etc.;
Implement high-impact - Roll out (Definition and
Program 1 : Development and
initiatives and use cases planning, drawing up
implementation of high-impact
and scale up the associated specifications, selecting
AI solutions
prototypes service providers,
execution, change
management and
deployment) AI solutions.
- Strengthen human
Program 2 : Strengthening Strengthen human
capabilities in terms
human capabilities of actors in capabilities in terms of AI and
of AI and big data
AI professions and positions big data management
management.
- Support training and
research;
- Develop sustainable
Program 3 : Support for Provide better support funding mechanisms for
training, research, innovation, for research, innovation, research and innovation;
the private sector and the private sector and - Bolster subregional and
cooperation cooperation in the field of AI international cooperation.
- Establish ‘local
champions’ of AI
- Adopt legislation
regulating AI in Benin;
- Establish a controlled
environment for the
Program 4 : Implementation Update the legal and development of AI
of governance framework for AI regulatory framework for AI initiatives;
and big data management and big data management - Define and roll out a big
data management model
(processes, organization,
governance and tools).
22 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

2.2. PLAN OF ACTION
Specific objectives Actions Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
Program 1: Development and opportunistic implementation of AI solutions in high-priority sectors
Setting up the implementation
x
mechanism
Carry out preliminary actions
Conducting preparatory studies
for specifications and economic x
and financial studies
Equipping the existing National
x x
Data Center with AI services
Implementing AI solutions
Implementing AI solutions x x x x x
Program 2: Strengthening human capabilities of actors in AI professions and positions
Integration of basic training,
Training in the field of AI and specific programming training,
x x x x
Data Science and ongoing training courses
into the educational system
Implementation and rollout
of a capacity development
Strengthening human
program for AI aimed at public x x x x
capabilities in terms of AI
and private actors, as well as
end users
Implementation and rollout of a
capacity development program
Strengthening human
for big data management
capabilities in terms of big data x x x x
aimed at providers and
management
consumers of data, as well as
end users
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 23

Objectifs
Actions An 1 An 2 An 3 An 4 An 5
spécifiques
Program 3: Support for training, research, innovation, the private sector and cooperation
Equipping universities and
Support training and research X X X X
promoting partnerships in AI
Bolstering institutional
support to facilities in
Develop sustainable funding charge of entrepreneurship
mechanisms for research and and innovation in terms of X X X X
innovation engagement and sustainable
provision of resources allocated
to startups.
Bolstering institutional
X X X X X
cooperation and collaboration
Bolster subregional and
international cooperation.
Organizing major events
X X X X X
focused on AI
Program 4: Implementation of governance framework for AI and big data management
Adopting legislation regulating
Adopt legislation regulating AI
the relevant ethical and liability X X
in Benin
issues
Creating a controlled
environment for the
Establish a controlled
development of AI initiatives
environment for the X
based on articles 406, 407
development of AI initiatives
and 408 of the Code of Digital
Affairs
Definition and introduction
Define and roll out a big data
of procedures for the data X X X
management model.
collection and provision chain
24 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

The catalytic actions in the implementation of the strategy, allowing for the
objectives to be achieved, are :
Action 1.2. Implementing AI solutions
Action 2.2. Implementation and rollout of a capacity development program
for AI aimed at public and private actors, as well as end users
Action 2.3. Implementation and rollout of a capacity development program
for big data management aimed at providers and consumers of data, as well
as end users
Action 4.2. Creating a controlled environment for the development of AI
initiatives based on articles 406, 407 and 408 of the Code of Digital Affairs
Action 4.3. Definition and introduction of procedures for the data collection
and provision chain
ACTION 0.1. Setting up the implementation mechanism
This involves setting up the mechanism for implementing the strategy described
in Chapter 4.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
The strategy being The mechanism for implementing the strategy being
1 month
validated set up
ACTION 0.1. Conducting preparatory studies for specifications and
economic and financial studies
This involves carrying out technical and economic feasibility studies, ultimately
producing :
Specifications for the implementation of the actions;
An economic and financial model for the strategy.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
The framework for
The specifications being drawn up
implementing the 4 months
The economic and financial model being drawn up
strategy being set up
ACTION 1.1. Equipping the existing Data Center with AI services
This involves equipping the existing data center with a layer of technical services
which allow for the development, execution and use of AI solutions.
Access to this layer must be shared, allowing the data center to operate in
‘Artificial Intelligence as a Service’ mode (see Annex 3) for all the solutions and
initiatives to be implemented.
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 25

AI As A Service sTack
Machine learning, inference services…
Development service for AI solutions, Framework, SDK
VMs, big data software, AI data (e.g. data lak es,
AI, etc. (e.g. Hadoop) N˚SQL,…)
Existing Infrastructure Services
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
-The framework for
implementing the
strategy being set up The AI service layer being set up 9 months
-Availability of the
data center
ACTION 1.2. Implementing AI solutions
Description and objectives
This action covers the development cycle for AI solutions, including:
Managing the portfolio of identified use cases;
Definition and planning;
Drawing up the specifications and selecting the service providers for execution;
Production and rollout of AI solutions;
Implementation of change management and buy-in actions.
When producing AI solutions, the top priority should be to scale up the existing
solutions.
With a view to establishing and strengthening local expertise and developing
national champions, priority should be given to local companies or groups
involving local companies.
Furthermore, to speed up the production of (essential) PoCs in AI projects,
African (e.g. https://zindi.africa/) and global platforms can be leveraged (with
local actors serving as intermediaries).
The assessment of the current situation brought up the following use cases:
26 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Technological complication: lack of existing AI models (algorithms) for the use
case or the need to overhaul an existing model;
Data-related complication: lack of high-quantity, high-quality data and the
degree of pre-processing required to use the data;
Business impact: business gain achieved or scale of business issue resolved.
Complication
Business Impact
DataSECTOR Use Case / Issue / Initiative Technological (High, Medium,
related
Low)
Predictions regarding job
Medium High Low
applications
Automatic detection of
Medium High Low
administrative documents
Public
Help with automatic document
Administration Low Medium High
classification
Automatic reading Low Low High
Customer service High N/A N/A
Predictions regarding resource
availability (water, soil,
feedstock, etc.) and production Medium High Medium
planning based on market
prospects
Detection of various diseases
Low High High
affecting production
Prediction of sorghum yield
using drones and machine High N/A High
Agriculture
learning
Rice disease detector High N/A High
Environmental monitoring High High High
Food quality evaluation Low Medium Low
Management of the land
Medium N/A N/A
registry map
Living conditions
Monitoring of town planning
Medium N/A N/A
and illegal construction
Suggested postings based on
Education Medium Medium Medium
skills and preferences
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 27

Prediction of academic
High
performance
Personalized academic paths High High Medium
Education
Prediction of student behavior High High Medium
Natural language processing
(e.g. translation from local
Medium High High
languages into French), speech
recognition
Smart waste sorting High High Medium
Environment Climate prediction Medium High Medium
Combating coastal erosion High N/A N/A
Smart tax audits Medium Medium High
Prioritization of services based
High High Medium
on user journey and privileges
Processing of tender
High High Low
documents
Streamlining of public
Finance & expenditure High High High
Economy
Identification of potential
sources of tax revenue through
analysis of port entries and High N/A N/A
exits, logging, or truck traffic
on national highways
Management of innovation
N/A N/A High
patents
Traffic jam prediction High Low Low
Infrastructure & Optimization of logistics flows High High Medium
Transportation
Predictive management of
incidents and maintenance of
Elevé Faible Faible
water, electricity and fiber optic
networks,
Automatic data extraction Medium Medium High
Justice
Prediction of civil protection
Medium Medium Low
measures
28 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Justice Legal assistance applications High High Medium
Assistance with the use of
Media High N/A High
media archives
Application d’assistanat
Elevé Elevé Moyen
juridique
Aide pour l’exploitation des
Médias Elevé N/A Elevé
archives médias
Optimizing the unloading
process and reducing dwell High N/A High
time of critical cargo containers
Hazard detection (rainfall for
unloading cargo, temperature High N/A High
for storing hydrocarbons, etc.)
Port
Prediction of import and export
High N/A High
flows of cargo
Optimization of the flow of
N/A N/A High
trucks
Assistance with diagnosis and
Medium Medium High
treatment
Production of disease
High High Medium
prediction models
Sector governance assistance
Medium High Low
tool (Data Visualization)
Management of mass health
campaigns (vaccination, raising
Medium Medium Medium
awareness, infectious diseases,
etc.)
Healthcare
Voice system in national
language for pre-diagnosis of High N/A High
certain diseases
Virtual reality surgical
High N/A High
procedures
Cancer detection via medical
image processing (e.g. liver High Low High
cancer)
Drug monitoring prediction,
detection of high-risk patients, High High High
detection of infections
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 29

Support for healthcare worker
Healthcare High N/A High
decision-making
Prediction of emergency
Low High Low
vehicle response
Prediction of number of
Low High Low
emergency calls
Prediction of offenses High High Low
Video filtering: Detection
and removal of pornographic High High Medium
scenes
Analysis of video streams from
High N/A N/A
Security & city CCTV sources
Defense
Combating poaching in nature
High N/A High
reserves
Prevention of security risks
High N/A High
(BARSA with DMIA France)
Management of the movement
of people in the event of an High N/A High
epidemic situation
Surveillance of borders and
High N/A High
maritime coasts
Automatic data analysis for
the detection of suspicious
Cybersecurity Medium High Medium
behavior, prevention and
detection of cyberattacks
Augmented reality for tourism
Tourism High N/A High
to Benin
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Availability of the AI
service layer in the
5 years (prioritizing
national data center
Number of operational AI solutions projects with prototypes
or, if not possible,
Number of sectors covered ready and the potential
consider a cloudfor high impact)
based solution in the
interim.
30 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

ACTION 2.1. Integration of basic training, specific programming
training, and ongoing training courses into the educational
system
Description and objectives
This will involve establishing an educational system offering real career
opportunities in AI and big data management, but also providing every student
in the educational system with basic knowledge about the workings of AI and
big data management.
In order to strengthen these capacities, these activities should :
Update some existing curricula (from basic education to ongoing training) in
order to include subjects relating to AI and big data management.
Create and popularize specific degree courses in AI and big data management
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
None Number of people trained in AI and big data 4 years
ACTION 2.2. Implementation and rollout of a capacity development
program for AI aimed at public and private actors, as well as end
users
Description and objectives
This will involve organizing capacity development activities for AI aimed at public
and private actors, as well as end users.
In order to strengthen these capacities, these activities should cover, amongst
other things :
The benefits (impact on products and services, businesses, etc.) of AI for the
entire ecosystem, most notably for sectors such as agriculture (MAEP, SNA,
INRAB, etc.), healthcare, finance, security, education, transportation, digital
issues, and e-governance;
The advantages for end users, particularly in terms of employability;
The institutional framework for the implementation of AI, in order to reassure
stakeholders;
The practical details of implementing AI solutions and each person’s role in
this ecosystem.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Number of people whose capacities have been
None 4 years
strengthened for each category
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 31

ACTION 2.3. Implementation and rollout of a capacity development
program for big data management aimed at providers and
consumers of data, as well as end users
Description and objectives
This will involve organizing capacity development activities aimed at data
providers, as well as for end users, with a view to encouraging them to share
their data.
Part of the implementation of this action can be pooled with the implementation
of Action 3.1 on AI capacity development.
In order to strengthen these capacities, these activities should cover, amongst
other things :
The benefits (impact on products and services, businesses, etc.) of big data
management for providers and consumers;
The advantages for end users;
The institutional framework for big data management, in order to reassure
stakeholders;
The practical details of the big data management cycle;
The support measures that data providers can rely upon.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Number of capacity development activities carried
None 4 years
out on big data management
ACTION 3.1. Equipping training facilities (universities, institutes,
training and research centers) to work on AI and big data, and
promoting partnerships in AI
Description and objectives
The development of AI solutions by the IMSP and the IFRI is very promising. The
IMSP’s supercomputer is an essential asset in developing these solutions and in
establishing Benin’s positioning within the subregion in terms of AI.
During the initial stages, this action will provide the IMSP with the necessary
equipment to exploit the full potential of its supercomputer. This will involve, at
a minimum :
Fitting out new work rooms (there is currently only one);
Setting up FabLabs;
Forging partnerships with the private sector with a view to developing and
scaling up AI solutions;
Developing academic research partnerships on AI issues.
At later stages, this action will allow for the IFRI to be equipped in a complementary
way.
32 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
The IMSP and the IFRI being fully equipped
None Number of partnerships established with universities 4 years
and the private sector in AI.
ACTION 3.2. Bolstering institutional support to facilities in charge
of entrepreneurship and innovation in terms of engagement and
sustainable provision of resources allocated to startups
Description and objectives
This will involve, in particular, providing assistance for facilities in charge of
entrepreneurship (e.g.: single point of contact for promoting SMEs) and innovation
(e.g.: Sèmè City) in their respective roles of supporting entrepreneurship and
innovation in AI.
Indeed, Sèmè City’s activities in terms of training and launching AI initiatives
are promising, and some projects require assistance in order to be scaled up
effectively.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Number of initiatives and innovations financially
supported
None Number of SAEIs (Innovative Entrepreneurship 4 years
Support Facilities) improved
Number of AI companies financially supported
ACTION 3.3. Bolstering institutional cooperation and collaboration
Description and objectives
Benin collaborates with many organizations in the field of AI. Numerous
institutions are stepping up their focus on the subject.
However, there is an absence of African actors on the issues of regulation and
standardization.
In particular, this will involve :
Strengthening institutional collaborations (win-win) with institutions (AFRIA,
ECOWAS, SMART AFRICA, UNESCO, etc.);
Strengthening bilateral and multilateral cooperation agreements for
technology exchange and transfer, such as with the DMIA;
Establishing collaborations on AI with organizations such as ISO, Global AI
Index, etc.;
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 33

Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Number of collaborations established
Number of South-South, UEMOA, AU, Smart Africa
None collaborations per high-priority sector 5 years
Number of partnerships established by universities
Rate of achievement of partnership targets
ACTION 3.4. Organizing major events focused on AI
Description and objectives
This will involve organizing events geared towards innovation and raising
awareness, along with events that can contribute to raising Benin’s profile :
Supporting existing major events. For example, the MAIC international AI
competition, the Benin Workshop on Artificial Intelligence, and the Summer
School on Artificial Intelligence (EEIA);
Organizing hackathons and competitions for SMEs and young entrepreneurs
with the goal of developing innovative solutions in the field of AI;
Organizing national and international AI trade fairs and conferences.
This action was implemented through the first edition of the Digital
Entrepreneurship and Artificial Intelligence Exhibition (SENIA), which took
place July 7-9, 2022 at the Palais des Congrès in Cotonou, featuring :
Seven (7) panels;
Eight (8) presentations / Keynote speeches;
Ten (10) demonstrations;
Thirty (30) stands;
Over 2500 visitors.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Number of hackathons
Number of trade fairs and conferences
Number of innovative solutions (for each sector)
None resulting from the hackathons 5 years
Number of trade fairs and major international events
participated in
Number of trade fairs held
ACTION 4.1. Adopting legislation regulating the relevant ethical
and liability issues
Description and objectives
Along with the foundation of the Code of Digital Affairs, this action is one of the
major pillars designed to ensure the proper governance of AI in Benin. It consists
34 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

of making provisions in the Code of Digital Affairs and the Criminal Code for the
ethical and liability issues related to AI, in the same way that Book V of the Code
of Digital Affairs exhaustively covers issues related to personal data.
Indeed, the provisions of Book V of the Code of Digital Affairs primarily cover the
liability issues (e.g. article 387) related to the protection of personal data.
This legislation should, for example, formalize and institute impact analyses and
monitoring of AI solutions throughout their lifecycle, much in the same way it
does for personal data (through articles 428 and 429 of the Code of Digital Affairs).
Any such monitoring must be instituted to ensure that AI systems are designed
and implemented with due consideration for key concepts such as people,
the planet, prosperity, peace, transparency, justice and fairness, accountability,
non-maleficence, privacy, benevolence, freedom and autonomy, sustainability,
dignity and solidarity.
The organization in charge of this monitoring and the enforcement of the
legislation should be identified.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
None Adoption of legislation 12 months
ACTION 4.2. Creating a controlled environment for the
development of AI initiatives based on articles 406, 407 and 408 of
the Code of Digital Affairs
Description and objectives
Pending the establishment of a regulatory body for AI, and in order to initiate
the implementation of AI solutions within the framework of the SNIAM in the
meantime, it is necessary for this to be done within a suitable framework.
To this end, articles 406, 407 and 408 of the Code of Digital Affairs allow for the
establishment of a controlled environment for the development of AI initiatives,
through the publication of simplification and processing standards or exemption
measures.
It will therefore be necessary to set up this controlled environment based on
these provisions of the Code of Digital Affairs.
Pre-requisites Performance indicators Duration
Controlled environment being established and
None 6 months
operational.
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 35

ACTION 4.3. Definition and introduction of procedures for the
data collection and provision chain
Description and objectives
The implementation of this action will allow for high-quality, high-quantity
data to be input into AI solutions. This data can be structured or unstructured,
personal or non-personal data, open, etc.
This action will help the interoperability framework to evolve by complementing:
The procedures for data collection and management of the relationship
between data providers, data aggregators, data collectors, the data processor
and data consumers;
The actors (providers, collectors and processor) in charge of and involved in
the system;
Technical interoperability with the recommended network, transport, transfer
and service protocols (e.g. HTTP(S), FTP(S), SAML, OAuth);
Syntactic interoperability with, amongst others, JSON (to take APIs into
account), XSD, etc.;
Semantic interoperability to ensure that once shared, data can be understood
by other systems;
Data governance with the recommended types of data repository architectures
and associated rules, data dictionary, metadata, in a big data management
context: requirements for data aggregators, data collectors, etc.;
Appointment of Chief Data Officers (CDOs) in administrations. They oversee
the collection, management and storage of data in a given administration.
They ensure the availability of high-quality, high-quantity data;
The technical processing chain of the data, up to the point where it is made
available in the system. The data that collected and processed can be
structured and/or unstructured. The diagram below lays out the principle of
the collection and processing chain.
FIGURE 6 : PRINCIPLE OF THE COLLECTION AND PROCESSING CHAIN
36 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

This collection and processing chain will use, in particular :
The National Interoperability Platform (NIP);
ETL/ELT processes, including upstream data cleansing;
Migration and transformation databases (both relational and non-relational);
MDM (Master Data Management as a Service);
National Digitalization Centre (NDC);
The existing PKI to ensure that transactions are secure.
This action must be carried out in phases, as detailed below :
Phase 1 :
Updating the interoperability framework;
Implementing the processing chain;
Phase 2 : Finalizing the implementation of the processing chain;
Phase 3 : Improving the collection and processing chain.
FIGURE 7 : BLOCK DIAGRAM OF THE BIG DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Data consumers
AI As A Service sTack
Machine learning, inference services…
Development service for AI solutions, Framework, SDK
Collecting process and
management of the
relation
VMs, big data software, AI data (e.g. data lakes,
AI, etc. (e.g. Hadoop) N˚SQL,…)
Chain of
processing
Data suppliers Collecting process
Existing Infrastructure Services
Data providers are the entities that make data available :
Open Data Platform : Will contribute to the provision of high-quality data, as the public
service is required to improve the quality of its own data before making it public, by way
of feedback mechanisms;
Agriculture : the Ministry of Agriculture, the Institut de Recherche d’Agronomie
Béninoise (INRAB), the Centres de Recherche Agricole (CRA);
Healthcare : the Ministry of Health, the National Health Information Management
System (DHIS2), a data warehouse producing indicators (AIDS, etc.), the National Malaria
Control Program;
Transportation : Centre National de Sécurité Routière (CNSR), Société des
Infrastructures Routières du Bénin (SIRB), Compagnie de Transports, Port Autonome
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 37

de Cotonou, Société de contrôle technique, Société de délivrance de documents de
transport;
Education : e-results, EDUCMASTER, Baccalaureate Holders’ Platform;
Economy and Finance database : Economic statistics, INSTaD (formerly INSAE), Taxes
(taxation, land registry, property tax), Direction Générale du Trésor et de la Comptabilité
Publique, Direction Générale de la Douane et des Droits Indirects, Public Markets, Stock
Exchanges, Chamber of Commerce, CAA (official development assistance), Agence
Nationale des Domaines et du Foncier (ANDF); Civil status : ANIP (RNPP database)
ARCEP : provider of data related to the ICT sector;
Private sector data : Network and Mobile Operators, Banks and Insurance, Microfinance,
Electricity Supply Company (SBEE), Water Supply Company (SONEB), Internet Service
Providers, Pay-TV/Radio channels, VOD Content.
Subregional and international data : Stock exchanges, research network data;
Data aggregators : search engines and social networks.
The data collector is the entity that collects the data and manages the relationship
with the data providers and the user;
The data processor is the entity in charge of using the ‘AI as a Service’ infrastructure.
This can be the same entity as the collector;
The data consumers are the administrations (or any actor) using the data to build
digital solutions, or for any other purpose.
Pré requis Performance indicators Duration
Availability of the AI
service layer in the
national data center Interoperability framework being updated in year 2
or, if not possible, Processing chain being partly operational in year 3 3 years
consider a cloud- Processing chain being finalized in year 4
based solution in the
interim.
38 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

MECHANISM FOR FUNDING
AND MOBILIZATION OF
RESOURCES
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 39

3.1. FUNDING MECHANISM
Over the 2023-2027 period, the funding required for the strategy is estimated to
be approximately CFAF 4.68 billion.
The funding mechanism and the mobilization of financial resources are
fundamental to the successful implementation of the Artificial Intelligence
strategy.
As a significant amount of investment is required, the funding strategy revolves
around the mobilization of both internal and external resources.
The main objective at hand is to provide adequate, sustainable financial
mechanisms and resources to launch the Artificial Intelligence revolution in
Benin.
The establishment of appropriate advisory structures and the development of
strategies for each component will garner financial support from development
partners on a vast scale.
Although external resources are certainly key to funding the implementation of
the strategy, the mobilization of internal financial resources nonetheless remains
necessary. The measures below will make a significant contribution to tackling
the issue of funding:
Call for national funding from both the state and the private sector;
Call for bilateral and multilateral assistance from external sources;
Call for foreign private capital within the framework of a Public-Private
Partnership (PPP);
Mobilization of national savings.
3.2. MOBILIZATION OF RESOURCES
FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
STRATEGY
The development of AI requires a significant mobilization of both human
and financial resources in order to establish the necessary technological
infrastructure, develop the capacities of the players involved, and kickstart the
ecosystem.
40 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

METHODS OF
IMPLEMENTATION
Stratégie NatiNonatailoen da’lI nAtretilfiligceianl cInet Aelrltigifiecnieclele a entd d Beisg M DéagtaaD Satrtaat e 2g0y2 23 0- 2230 -2 72027 4411

4.1. IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM
4.1.1. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The implementation mechanism has been established in accordance with
Decree no. 2021 - 586 of November 10, 2021 and in view of the general framework
for the management of public investment and Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November
14, 2018 on the organization of governing authorities for digital programs and
projects in the Republic of Benin.
The cross-sectoral nature of this strategy will require an implementation
mechanism at two different levels :
A cross-sectorial level that will allow for the steering and coordination of the
overall implementation of the strategy. The level will be the responsibility of
the Ministry of Digital Affairs and Digitalization.
This coordinating body will work by engaging with the Conference of Chief
Information Officers and all stakeholders (universities, startups, AI partners,
etc.) involved in the ecosystem.
A sector-specific level which will allow for the ministries in question to steer
the implementation of the AI projects (with each one handling their respective
projects). The sectoral management framework will be implemented in
accordance with Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November 14, 2018.
In addition to these two levels, a public investment management framework
will be established in accordance with Decree no. 2021 - 586 of November
10, 2021. According to this legislation, this framework is to be put in place if
necessary, regardless of the level of operation.
4.1.2. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ACTORS
Actor Responsibilities
- Ensures the overall oversight and steering of
the strategy.
- A national governance approach was
deployed to develop and validate this strategy,
with the participation of representatives
from both government and other key
stakeholders in order to make sure that each
Ministry of Digital Affairs and Digitalization
sector’s specific needs were identified, and
ensuring that no key stakeholder group was
excluded from the process. This approach will
also help to improve the coordination of its
implementation.
- Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November 14, 2018
42 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Actor Responsibilities
- Provides its opinion on the implementation
of the strategy in the light of feedback from its
sectoral implementation.
- Represents an essential link in the change
Conference of Chief Information Officers management and buy-in strategy to be put in
place.
- Represents an essential link in the data
collection mechanism to be put in place.
- Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November 14, 2018
These are all the actors, aside from
the ministries, who are impacted by or
beneficiaries of certain actions in the strategy.
They are involved in the implementation of the
actions.
Stakeholders in the ecosystem They express their needs and provide their
opinions.
These are public service users and actors in the
field of innovation and entrepreneurship, such
as Sèmè City, AI startups, universities, AFRIA,
SMART AFRICA, etc.
Responsible for all the AI projects under its
Commission ministérielle des systèmes
ministry, in accordance with Decree no. 2018 -
d’information et de la connectivité
531 of November 14, 2018
Agence des Systèmes d’Information et du Contributes to the implementation of AI
Numérique (ASIN) projects
Works on AI projects in accordance with
Steering Committee
Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November 14, 2018
Works on AI projects in accordance with
Technical Committee
Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November 14, 2018
Sectoral Committee for the Monitoring of the Works on AI projects in accordance with
Government Action Program Decree no. 2021 - 586 of November 10, 2021
Il travaille sur les projets d’IA conformément au
Program Support Units
Décret 2021 - 586 du 10 novembre 2021
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 43

4.2. EVALUATION MECHANISMS
The evaluation mechanism has been established in accordance with Decree
no. 2021 - 586 of November 10, 2021 and in view of the general framework for
the management of public investment and Decree no. 2018 - 531 of November
14, 2018 on the organization of governing authorities for digital programs and
projects in the Republic of Benin.
In order to assess the performance achieved in the implementation of this
strategy, and in accordance with the principle of accountability and the ‘iterative
and incremental’ principle, an annual evaluation is required.
Specifically, this provision makes it possible to measure and evaluate the extent
to which the objectives have been reached in order to:
Support the steering of the strategy by promptly providing information on
the progress made through the strategic initiatives (i.e. the programs, projects
and actions implemented) and take corrective steps should said progress
prove insufficient;
Confirm and adjust the scopes of the work packages to be undertaken in the
subsequent phase;
Carry out periodic assessments to check whether the strategy is working
effectively and to promote knowledge sharing and learning amongst the
parties involved;
Foster accountability and promote the obligation to report amongst the
actors involved.
4.3. ACTIVITIES AND PERFORMANCE
MEASUREMENT FRAMEWORK
This performance measurement framework establishes the targets to be
achieved from one year to the next over the five-year course of the strategy.
When the SNIAM has been implemented, according to the Government AI
Readiness Index, Benin should have improved its ranking (and risen to be on a
par with Mauritius) in the following areas:
Field Line of action
Governance Vision
Governance and ethics
Digital capacity
Adaptability
Data and infrastructure Data presentation
Availability of data
AI infrastructure
Technological sector Human capital
Capacity for innovation
Scale
44 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

4.4. SUPPORTING MEASURES
TABLE 14 : SUPPORTING MEASURES
Potential to accelerate Potential impact on
N° Measure the implementation the sustainability of
of the SNIAM its effects
Incorporate AI training into the strategy for the
11 educational sector in order to quintuple the current Medium High
volumes (25x3)
Accelerate the adoption of the Startup Act to support
2 High High
the implementation of the strategy
Continue the implementation of the Fonds d’Appui à
3 l’Entrepreneuriat Numérique (FAEN) by the Agence High High
pour le Développement des PME
Continue to establish the interoperability framework
4 in the field of healthcare, as part of the National High High
e-Health Strategy
4.5. RISK ANALYSIS AND CONDITIONS
FOR SUCCESS
The implementation of the SNIAM involves risks which need to be suitably
managed and circumvented. The success of SNIAM depends on actors at every
level controlling these risks.
The main risk factors that could hinder the achievement of the SNIAM’s expected
results are:
Failure of the management bodies to function and lack of engagement
from the stakeholders: the bodies charged with implementing the SNIAM
failing to function would greatly hinder the implementation of the strategy. It
is essential to ensure the optimal functioning of the implementing bodies, in
terms of both the regularity of their meetings and the relevance and applicability
of their deliberations, in order to guarantee the best chances of success for the
SNIAM.
Recommendations: Organize a far-reaching information and awareness
campaign on the SNIAM for the general public, the various administrations,
and the development partners, with a view to encouraging rapid buy-in to the
strategy.
The inadequacies of the mechanism for mobilizing financial resources
expose the SNIAM to the risk of failing to secure the necessary funding.
Recommendations: develop PPPs, promote the development of SMEs/startups
in AI, and mobilize financial resources from various international funding sources
specializing in AI (see ‘funding mechanism’ p35, 3.1.).
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 45

CONCLUSION
4466 NStaratitoéngaiel A Nratitfiiocniaal lIen tde’Ilnligteelnligcee nacned A Britgifi Dciaetlale S ettr adteesg My é2g0a2D3 a- t2a0 227023 - 2027

Numerous governments around the world have rolled out strategies or targeted actions
in order to encourage the adoption of artificial intelligence.
As the possible uses of artificial intelligence continue to proliferate, adopting a strategy
to guide how it is implemented will enable the Beninese government to take full
advantage of it and ensure the general public’s confidence in its use.
Benin’s National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy proposes a response to
the issues faced by strategic sectors in line with the objectives of the NDP and the GAP,
and aims to position Benin as a pioneer in the emergence of an AI ecosystem within the
subregion.
This strategy sets out the principles for implementation, lines of action and objectives
that will allow for the successful integration of artificial intelligence into the public
administration, the private sector, and society in general.
As such, it sets out four (4) implementation programs and ten (10) objectives, grouped
into four strategic lines of action, which will guide the overall implementation of artificial
intelligence :
Strategic Objective 1 : Implement high-impact initiatives and use cases
Strategic Objective 2 : Strengthen capabilities and educate people on AI and big data
management
Strategic Objective 4 : Provide better support for research, innovation, the private
sector and cooperation in the field of AI
Strategic Objective 4 : Update the institutional and regulatory framework for AI and
big data management
The establishment of an AI ecosystem is a long-term pursuit, and this strategy allows
the country to lay the foundations that will make its emergence possible by addressing
the major challenges involved, namely :
Challenges linked to data, relating to the collection, preparation, access, storage and
governance of the data required to operate artificial intelligence mechanisms;
The legal and regulatory challenges associated with artificial intelligence, specifically
its governance and regulation;
Ethical challenges, specifically issues relating to data protection and the protection of
fundamental rights.
The funding for this strategy will come from the national budget, the private sector, and
TFPs. The strategy is designed to make artificial intelligence a lever to raise Benin’s
profile and provide support for strategic sectors by means of a tailor-made local
ecosystem.
The integration of artificial intelligence into Benin’s day-to-day operations will require
the participation of all public agencies, the public sector, and the Beninese people,
which will make it possible to achieve the intended effects of improving productivity
and the quality of products and services in high-priority sectors and those which can
offer promising opportunities for AI. This dynamic will contribute to the creation of a
landmark AI ecosystem driven not only by Beninese companies, but also by the fruits
of technology and knowledge transfer between research laboratories and the private
sector.
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 47

48 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

APPENDICES
Stratégie NatNioantaiolen dal’I Antretilfilicgieanl Icnet eAlrlitgifiecniceell ea netd d Beisg M Déagtaa DStartaat e 2g0y2 230 -2 230 -2 27027 4499

6.1. APPENDIX 1 : REFERENCES
1. BCEAO. Rapport annuel sur la situation de l’inclusion financière dans l’UEMOA au
titre de l’année 2019. P14. 2019.
2. ARCEP. Rapport annuel d’activité 2020 ARCEP. P.49. 2020.
3. BCEAO. Rapport annuel sur les services financiers numériques dans l’UEMOA au
titre de l’année 2019. P17. 2019.
4. MicroSave Consulting. FinTech inclusives en Afrique francophone Rapport pays -
Bénin.
5. Oxford, Insights. Government AI Readiness Index 2020. 2020.
6. Forum Economique Mondial. The Global Competitiveness Report 2019. 2019.
7. Institute, Portulans. THE NETWORK READINESS INDEX. 2020.
8. Nations Unies. E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2018. 2018.
9. AI Expo Africa. Africa, AI Expo. 2020.
10. Mondiale, Banque. Rapport Doing Business. 2020.
11. ARCEP. OBSERVATOIRE DE LA TELEPHONIE MOBILE. 2021.
12. Observatoire de l'internet. 2021.
13. Smart Africa. Plan directeur de l'IA. 2021.
14. Ministère du Plan. Plan National de Développement 2018 - 2025. 2018.
15. Gouvernement de la République du Kenya. Digital Economy Blueprint: Powering
Kenya’s Transformation . https://ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Kenyas-DigitalEconomy-Blueprint.pdf. [En ligne] (2019).
16. Le Fonds d'Appui à l'Entrepreneuriat Numérique (FAEN). https://faen.gouv.bj/apropos/. [En ligne]
17. BCEAO. Stratégie régionale d’inclusion financière dans l’UEMOA : avancées et
perspectives.
18. Union Africaine. La stratégie de transformation numérique pour l'Afrique (20202030) . [https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/38507-doc-dtsenglish.pdf.]
19. FMI. la transformation numérique en afrique subsaharienne ; avril 2020 ; FMI.
2020.
20. Objectifs de développement durable : en phase avec les priorités de l’Afrique.
Renouveau, Afrique. 3, 2015, Vol. 29.
21. CNUCED. Le rapport de la CNUCED en 2017 sur l’économie de l’information .
[https://www.itu.int/net4/ITU-D/idi/2017/index.html] 2017 : s.n.
22. NRI. Network Readiness Index 2020:. [https://networkreadinessindex.org/
countries/benin/] 2020.
23. The World Bank. Benin Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development . (P162599)
P.5.
24. Programme d'Action du Gouvernement (PAG). ORIENTATIONS STRATÉGIQUES
2021 DANS LE SECTEUR DE L’ÉCONOMIE NUMÉRIQUE. 2016 - 2021.
25. Banque Mondiale. Benin Overview. (2019a).
50 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

6.2. APPENDIX 2 : LISTS OF USE CASES
COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Managing job applications: suggesting suitable
candidates, eliminating candidates who do
not meet the minimum criteria, identifying
incomplete applications (in order to contact
these people again)
Objectives:
- Offer an automatic scoring of applicants
Predictions
Public Ad- in terms of the minimum requirements by
regarding
ministra- identifying shortcomings a priori Medium High Low
job application - Identify incomplete applications
tions
- Identify anomalies or cases of fraud
Metric:
- Detection rate of fraud or anomalies
- Suitability of the proposed candidates
Data:
- Data on competitions, requirements, etc.
- Other relevant data
Automatic validation of administrative
documents and data extraction
Objectives:
- Automatically detect the nature of the
administrative documents submitted
Automatic
- Verify their authenticity
Public Ad- detection of
Metric:
ministra- administra- Medium High Low
- Percentage of documents properly classified
tion tive docu-
- Percentage of false documents successfully
ments
identified
Data:
- Data on the nature of the documents
- Data on fraudulent documents
- Other data
Automatic sorting of documents
Objectives:
- Make it possible to identify the nature of
Help with
Public Ad- documents and offer automatic filing
automatic
ministra- Metric: Low Medium High
document
tion - Percentage of documents properly filed
classification
Data:
Data on documents
- Other data
Automatic reading of checks and sorting of
letters at the post office.
Objectives:
- Offer automatic routing of mail according to
its destination
Public AdAutomatic - Extract names and amounts on checks
ministra- Low Low High
reading Metric:
tion
- Check recognition rate
- Percentage of letters properly classified
Data:
- Data relating to handwriting
- Other data
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 51

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Ensure better customer management by
Customer
analyzing data such as voice calls, comments, High N/A N/A
service
etc.
Establish a platform making it possible to
detect fraudulent birth certificates. This occurs
as some people falsify their birth certificates to
change their age and apply for competitions
that are not open to them. This system could
be applied to any other document that could
be falsified (diplomas, identity cards, driving
licenses, etc.).
Objectives:
Public Ad- - Use a scan of the document to ascertain
ministra- whether or not the document is likely to be
tion Detection of fraudulent in order to trigger an inspection.
fraudulent This analysis will be done based on an image of
Low Low Medium
birth certifi- the document alone
cates - Use a scan of the document to extract the
various fields, make an inference, and deduce
whether or not the document is fraudulent in
order to trigger an inspection. The inference
will be made from the fields extracted
Metric:
Detection rate of fraudulent documents, or
other relevant metric.
Data:
- Database of documents identified as
fraudulent and non-fraudulent
- Any other data relating to the documents
Allow for better management and allocation of
land, water and feedstock and better planning
Predictions
of production.
regarding
Objectives:
resource
- Identify agricultural areas with good potential
availability
- Predict water consumption by area
(water, soil,
- Predict market demand for a given
feedstock,
agricultural product Medium High Medium
etc.) and
Metric:
production
- Prediction accuracy rate
planning
Data:
based on
- Weather-related data
market pros-
- Historical production and market demand
pects
data
- Any other sector-specific data
Agriculture
This system will make it possible to detect
the segment of the production affected by a
disease in order to better manage resources
and avoid applying pesticides to the entire
production
Detection
Objectives:
of various
- Use images captured by drone to identify the
diseases Low High High
plants affected by a disease
affecting
Metric:
production
- Production yield
Data:
- Images captured by drone
- Any other images of plants that can help train
AI
52 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Prediction
of sorghum
yield using Tools integrating current and historical crop
High N/A High
drones and and weather data
machine
Agriculture
learning
Rice disease AI solution to help producers anticipate the
High N/A High
detector treatments required to ensure production
Installing AI on a drone in order to collect
environmental information for inaccessible
areas in the event of a disaster.
Objectives:
- Map out the disaster-affected areas
- Guide rescue efforts
- Identify people in distress in the rubble
EnvironmenLiving Metric:
tal monito- High High High
conditions - Success rate of missions using the AI-enabled
ring
drone
- Rate of identification of people in distress
Data:
- Map data
- Image data to help the AI learn to recognize
objects
- Other relevant data
Implement an application that detects spoilage
and defects in edible food
Objectives:
- The ability to detect foods with anomalies
at the point of consumption or sale and sort/
Food quality
Agriculture classify them (in the case of use by a robot) Low Medium Low
evaluation
Metric:
- Number of anomalies correctly identified
Data:
- Images of foods with or without anomalies
- Other relevant data
Management of the Solution to improve the readability of the land
Medium N/A N/A
land registry registry map
map
Living
conditions Monitoring
of town
Identify illegal constructions through the
planning Medium N/A N/A
analysis of satellite images.
and illegal
construction
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 53

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
By using a student’s progress data, as well as
data relating to the choices made by students
following the same path, AI could make
recommendations for career choices.
Objectif:
- Propose a complete list of possible careers,
from most to least relevant
Metric:
- Assess student satisfaction with the choices
Suggested
made based on the recommendations made by
postings
the system
based on Medium Medium Medium
- Assess the employability rate resulting
skills and
from the choices made based on the
preferences
recommendations
- Assess the student’s success in their chosen
industry
Data:
- All data related to the student’s career path
- All data related to the career paths of other
students who have completed their cycle
- All data related to the job market
- Any other necessary data
Prediction
AI solution to support academic staff in
of academic High
providing guidance to students
performance
Personalized learning solutions, based on AI,
could be of great assistance to teachers who
Education
wish to differentiate their teaching methods.
Objectives:
- Adapt the level of difficulty of the exercises to
suit the student’s individual level
- Provide the teacher with a more helpful
Personalized
‘smart’ dashboard based on data collected
academic High High Medium
from students.
paths
Metric:
- Success rates or an evaluation of the system
by teachers and students
Data:
- Data related to learning and use of the
platform
- Other relevant data
Understand the risk factors likely to cause a
student to slip into absenteeism or drop out of
school entirely and intervene before this can
occur by alerting the educational community
and reorganizing the student’s human support
system
Objectives:
Prediction - Predict, with a certain degree of probability,
of student the risk of a student dropping out High High Medium
behavior - Identify certain high-risk behaviors
Metric:
- Actual dropout rate based on the predictions
of the system
Data:
- Data related to the student’s learning path
- Data regarding other students
- All relevant data
54 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Natural language processing (e.g.
translation AI solution to facilitate the adoption of
from local digital technologies by the segments of the Medium High High
languages population who do not speak or write French
into French),
speech recognition
Education
Detection of cheating in online testing
Objectif:
- Detect whether or not a student is cheating
Fraud detec- and trigger an inspection
High High High
tion Data:
- Data related to the use of the computer
equipment used for online exams
- Other relevant data
Smart waste sorting, potentially by embedding
AI into a robot
Objectif:
- Make it possible for a robot to sort waste
Smart waste intelligently
High High Medium
sorting Metric:
- Percentage of objects correctly identified
Data:
- Image data related to waste
- Other relevant data
Prediction of the risk of storms or other
climate-related hazards
EnvironObjectives:
ment
- Predict, with a certain degree of probability,
the risk of a storm
Climate pre- - Predict which areas will be affected
Medium High Medium
diction Metric:
- Prediction accuracy rate
Data:
- Historical data concerning storms
- Weather-related data
- Other relevant data
Combating
Identify coastal erosion through the analysis of
coastal ero- High N/A N/A
drone or satellite images.
sion
AI could analyze tax returns and tax credit
claims to identify cases of tax fraud and trigger
a tax audit.
Objectives:
- Identify suspicious tax returns
Finance & Smart tax
Metric: Medium Medium High
Economy audits
- Percentage of suspect tax returns correctly
identified
Data:
- Historical tax returns
- Other data
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 55

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Offering personalized services for citizens who
are often entitled to certain benefits, based on
their use of public platforms and services
Prioritization
Objectif:
of services
- Propose a list of services that could benefit
based on
the citizen High High Medium
user journey
Metric:
and privile-
- Evaluation of the service by citizens
ges
Data:
- Historical data on the use of public services
- Other relevant data
Automatic processing of data from tender
documents in order to check their conformity,
identify applications that meet the minimum
criteria, and flag up incomplete applications
Objectives:
- Identify inconsistencies or false documents in
Processing a tender application
of tender - Identify incomplete applications High High Low
documents - Identify applications that meet the minimum
criteria
Metric:
- Percentage of applications correctly identified
Data:
- Historical application data from candidates
- Other relevant data
Finance &
Smart management of allocations in order to
Economy
optimize budget portfolios (identify high-risk
projects and streamline investment)
Objectif:
- Identify, in terms of probability, a given
project’s likelihood of success or failure
RationaliMetric:
sation des
- Yet to be analyzed: because how can one tell High High High
dépenses
with any certainty that a project that was not
publiques
funded would definitely have failed ?
Data:
- Financial data related to investments and the
success of projects
- Supplier data
- Other financial data
Identification of
potential
sources of
tax revenue
through
AI solution to help administrative staff to
analysis of High N/A N/A
expand the tax base.
port entries
and exits,
logging, or
truck traffic
on national
highways
56 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
ManageFinance & ment of Analyze the database to identify similar patents
N/A N/A High
Economy innovation that have already been registered.
patents
Contribute to relieving road traffic by
predicting traffic jams. The application would
also make it possible to streamline other key
traffic elements, potentially optimizing traffic
lights and public transportation (if necessary).
The implementation of AI in the field of public
transportation will help transport technology
to predict future demands in terms of both
transport and learning, ultimately providing
better and more efficient solutions. Predictions
could also adapt quickly to account for
disruptions such as traffic accidents and public
emergencies, increasing the safety of cities and
Traffic jam
infrastructure. High Low Low
prediction
Objectives:
- Predict congestion areas for a given route a
few hours in advance
- According to the user’s route, identify
congested areas and propose alternatives
Metric:
- Prediction accuracy rate
- Accuracy rate of alternative routes
Infrastruc- Prérequis
ture & - Road traffic data
Transpor- - GPS data from vehicles
tation - Data from cameras in specific locations
- Other data
For example, decongesting ports or improving
the safety of freight and passenger services to
reduce the traffic density of certain segments
Objectives:
- Survey areas to identify and take an inventory
of empty spaces
- Predict the needs of the supply chain as a
whole
Optimiza- - Identify routes that slow down the unloading
tion of logis- of a container from the port High High Medium
tics flows Metric:
- Time saved
- Reductions in costs
- Average length of time spent by a container
at the port
Data:
- Order and stock history
- Journey history of a container
- Other relevant data
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 57

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Predictive
management of
incidents
Infrastrucand mainture & Traffic analysis to identify or predict future
tenance of High N/A High
Transpor- incidents.
water, electation
tricity and
fiber optic
networks,
roads, DTT
Application assisting with automatic extraction
of data on convictions, provision of statistics on
the nature of offenses, and case law data.
Objectif:
Automatic - Offer a statistical dashboard of convictions
data extrac- with associated grounds Medium Medium High
tion Metric:
- Accuracy rate of information
Data:
- Legal data related to trials (documents,
exhibits, rulings, court transcripts, etc.)
Application to help establish a citizen
protection policy based on the analysis of
common crimes and their circumstances
Objectives:
Prediction
- Identify/predict areas with a high probability
of civil proof criminal activity Medium Medium Low
tection meaMetric:
sures
Justice - Rate of potential offenses avoided
- Change in the number of offenses and crimes
Data:
- Security data (offenses, transcripts, etc.)
By exploiting case law, AI could offer a process
to minimize government expenditure and,
in doing so, help the judiciary by proposing
a suitable course of action to speed up court
rulings.
Objectif:
- In the context of a case, bring up information
Legal assis- on similar cases and offer an approach to
tance appli- handling the case High High Medium
cations Metric:
- Satisfaction rate of magistrates using the
system
- Rate of suitability of the proposed courses of
action
Data:
- Legal data related to trials (documents,
exhibits, rulings, etc.)
Assistance
with the use Indexing of archives to facilitate information
Media High N/A High
of media retrieval.
archives
58 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Optimizing the
unloading
process and Using drones to identify available spaces and
High N/A High
reducing predict dwell time of containers.
dwell time of
critical cargo
containers
Hazard
detection
(rainfall for
unloading Predict weather conditions by analyzing sensor
Port cargo, tem- data to determine the best time to unload High N/A High
perature for certain types of cargo.
storing hydrocarbons,
etc.)
Prediction of
Predict the volume of cargo expected over a
import and
given period in order to adjust the resources High N/A High
export flows
available, allowing for better management.
of cargo
Optimiza- According to the space available at the port,
tion of the the weather, and other information, propose
N/A N/A High
flow of truc- a better approach to managing trucks at the
ks port.
Using data from the patient’s file, along with
the diagnoses of patients presenting with
similar symptoms, propose a list of possible
diagnoses from most to least probable. For
example in medical imaging, cancer detection,
radiology, e-health, etc.
Objectives:
- Provide doctors with a list of possible
Assistance
diagnoses based on the patient’s symptoms
with diagnoHealthcare - Analyze a medical image and use the data to Medium Medium High
sis and treatprovide a list of possible diagnoses
ment
Metric:
- Correct diagnosis rate
Data:
- Data from the patient’s file
- Symptoms
- Histories of patients with the same symptoms
who have been diagnosed correctly
- Any other medical data
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 59

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Based on the patient’s file and the history of
both the patient and other patients, identify
diseases that the patient may develop.
Objectives:
- Propose a list of diseases that a patient, or
Production anyone who requests to use the tool, could
of disease potentially develop
High High Medium
prediction Metric:
models - Prediction accuracy rate
Data:
- Data from the patient’s file
- Data from patients with similar files for whom
predictions proved to be correct
- All data in the field
Based on industry data, analyze a large volume
of data (Big Data) in order to propose smart
KPIs to facilitate better decision making
Objectives:
- Offer a dashboard with smarter metrics:
Sector go- prediction of bed occupancy rates, number of
vernance emergencies, shortages of certain medications,
assistance etc. Medium High Low
tool (Data Vi- Metric:
sualization) - Assessment of the business impact of
decisions taken based on the metrics proposed
in the dashboard
Data:
- All data available in the sector
Healthcare - All data available in other associated sectors
AI could help with the better management
of health campaigns by allowing for better
distribution of vaccines. It can also help to run
simulations of contagious diseases such as
Manage- COVID, etc.
ment of Objectives:
mass health - Help to run simulations in the case of a
campaigns contagious disease
(vaccina- - In the event of a vaccination campaign,
Medium Medium Medium
tion, raising identify high-risk areas to target for better
awareness, management of the campaign
infectious Metric:
diseases, - Evaluate the decisions made based on the
etc.) information produced by the system
Data:
- Patient-related data
- Movement data (GPS) of infected individuals
- Other data related to the sector
Voice system
in national AI solution to assist with doctor-patient
language for communication in remote populations with
High N/A High
pre-diagno- difficulty accessing areas served by major
sis of certain hospitals
diseases
60 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Virtual reaAI-enabled medical solution to assist surgeons
lity surgical High N/A High
with their work
procedures
Build an AI that can analyze a medical image
and detect spots or areas that could potentially
be a cancerous tumor in order to help doctors
Cancer deto diagnose them
tection via
Objectif:
medical
- Identify an area on a medical image that High Low High
image procould potentially be a cancerous tumor
cessing (e.g.
Metric:
liver cancer)
- Correct diagnosis rate
Data:
- Medical imaging data
Determine the side effects that a given
Healthcare
patient is most likely to develop as a result of a
treatment
Objectives:
Drug mo-
- Predict the most likely side effects for a given
nitoring
patient
prediction,
- Depending on the severity of the side effects,
detection
offer an alternative, more suitable treatment High High High
of high-risk
Metric:
patients,
- Rate of complaints related to side effects from
detection of
treatments
infections
Data:
- Patient history/file
- Data related to the treatment in question
- Other data related to the sector
Support for
healthcare
Propose smarter KPIs for decision making. High N/A High
worker decision-making
System to predict response (or vehicle dispatch)
based on historical response data
Objectives:
Prediction of - Predict the likely number of responses per day
Security & emergency or over a certain period of time
Low High Low
Defense vehicle res- Metric:
ponse - Prediction accuracy rate
Data:
- Historical response data
- Other data
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 61

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Prediction of number of emergency calls
in order to suitably prepare the internal call
center, predict the areas likely to require a
response, and triage incoming calls by urgency
(by analyzing tone of voice).
Objectives:
Prediction of - Prediction of number of emergency calls
number of - Prediction of areas likely to require a response
Low High Low
emergency - Classification of urgency of calls
calls Metric:
- Prediction accuracy rate
Data:
- Historical emergency call data
- Historical data on areas requiring a response
- Call recording data
- Other data
Implementation of a burglary prediction
system in order to pre-position defense forces
Objectives:
- Identify/predict areas with a high probability
Prediction of
of criminal activity High High Low
offenses
Metric:
- Offense rate
Data:
- Offense-related data
Video filSecurity & tering: De- AI-based solution to help prevent posting of,
Defense tection and and protect minors from uncontrolled access High High Medium
removal of
to, pornographic material
pornographic scenes
Analysis
of video
streams Use of video surveillance to identify certain
High N/A N/A
from city behaviors.
CCTV
sources
Combating
poaching in Analysis of animal movement patterns to
High N/A High
nature re- predict the trajectory of poachers.
serves
Prevention
of security Confidential High N/A High
risks
Management of the
movement
of people in Confidential High N/A High
the event of
an epidemic
situation
62 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

COMPLEXITY
BUSINESS
SECTOR U IN S I E TI C A A TI S V E E / ISSUE / DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES TECHNOLOGICAL DATA-RELATED (HIG I H M L , O P M A W E C D ) T I UM,
Surveillance
Security & of borders
Confidential High N/A High
Defense and maritime coasts
Implementation of AI techniques to improve
the ability to detect, prevent, and even deal
with previously unknown cyberattacks.
Objectives:
Automatic
- Identify suspicious behavior on the local
data analynetwork
sis for the
- Identify suspicious behavior on a computer
detection of
- Identify suspicious emails
Cybersecu- suspicious
Metric: Medium High Medium
rity behavior,
- Percentage of threats correctly identified
prevention
- Rate of improvement of security
and detecData:
tion of cybe-
- Data circulating on the network
rattacks
- Login history for programs on a computer
- Emails
- Data from the Internet
- Other relevant data
Augmented Use AI solutions to assist visitors with their
reality for journey before their arrival in Benin, during
Tourism High N/A High
tourism to their stay and after their return, in order to
Benin provide a richer, more immersive experience.
6.3. APPENDIX 3 : IA As A SERVICE
AI As A Service sTack
Machine learning, inference services…
Development service for AI solutions, Framework, SDK
VMs, big data software, AI data (e.g. data lak es,
AI, etc. (e.g. Hadoop) N˚SQL,…)
Existing Infrastructure Services
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 63

Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
Target users Data Processor, Collector, Consumers
The ‘Machine Learning as a Service’ solution is intended to provide a set of
Description tools including as data pre-processing, training models, evaluation models,
prediction models, etc.
Current situation Capacities require development
Application
ML tools
components
Main operating
Availability of sufficient computing power
requirements
Data Lake as a Service (DLaaS)
Target users Data Processor, Collector, Consumers
The ‘Data Lake as a Service’ solution is intended to provide an infrastructure
Description and middleware platform that makes it possible to manage the mass
storage of raw and unstructured data.
Current situation Capacities require development
Application
Big Data databases
components
Provision of Big Data databases
Main operating
Selection of multiple service levels corresponding to varying availability
requirements
commitments
Containers as a Service (CaaS)
Target users Data Processor, Collector, Consumers
The ‘Containers as a Service’ solution is intended to provide a middleware
Description
platform for container orchestration.
Current situation Capacities require development
Application
Container orchestration solution (such as Kubernetes, Open Shift)
components
Main operating
Hosting and orchestration of application containers
requirements
64 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Integration Platform as a Service (iPaaS)
Target users Data Processor, Collector, Consumers
The ‘Integration Platform as a Service’ solution is intended to provide an
Description environment for developing, deploying and executing inter-application
data flows or data intended to populate data sinks.
Current situation Capacities require development
Application
Interoperability services
components
Data flow development environment
Main operating
Administration and management of the data flow lifecycle
requirements
Data flow execution platform
Master Data Management as a Service (MDMaaS)
Target users Data Processor, Collector, Consumers
The ‘MDM as a Service’ solution is intended to provide government IS teams
Description
with a turnkey MDM solution to host and manage their repository data.
Current situation Capacities require development
Application
MDM solution
components
Main operating Storage and hosting of repository data
requirements Data lifecycle management process (record creation, updating, deletion)
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 65

6.4. APPENDIX 4 : COLLECTION AND
PROCESSING CHAIN
Data acquisition
Target users IT teams of administrations / Data collector
The aim of this service is to provide the mechanisms and data flows for data
Description
acquisition and integration in the architecture
Application Batch data loading (i.e. ETL)
components Ongoing data loading (i.e. data streaming)
Internal data acquisition
External data acquisition
Main operating Batch data acquisition and integration
requirements Ongoing data acquisition and integration
Quality and data transformation controls
Data loading
Data storage
Target users IT teams of administrations / Data collector
Description The purpose of this service is to make it possible to store data
Application Relational databases
components Non-relational databases (Big Data)
Main operating Storage of structured data in relational databases
requirements Storage of unstructured data in non-relational databases
66 National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027

Data processing
Target users IT teams of administrations
Description The purpose of this service is to make it possible to process stored data
Current situation Capacities require development
Application
Data processing (ETL, data streaming)
components
Mass (batch) processing
Training and operation of artificial intelligence models (self-learning,
Main operating
machine learning, deep learning)
requirements
Real-time processing (ongoing analysis of the data received, for example
in order to trigger follow-up actions or issue notifications)
Provision of data
Target users IT teams of administrations
The purpose of this service is to make it possible to provide refined data at
Description
the points of consumption
Current situation Capacities require development
Application Data warehouse and data marts
components API Gateway
Main operating Storage and structuring of data provided (DWH and DM)
requirements Data exposure (API, open data)
Data consumption
Target users IT teams of administrations
The purpose of this service is to provide the tools that make it possible for
Description
the clients of the platform to consume the data according to their needs
Current situation Capacities require development
Artificial intelligence model training studio Data visualization tools
Application Data mining studio
components Business intelligence tools
Report production services
Data science studio (AI development and training)
Exploration / data mining
Main operating
Display of dashboards
requirements
Event management (e.g. alerts)
Reporting
National Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Strategy 2023 - 2027 67

The electronic version of the SNIAM is available at
https://numerique.gouv.bj/
If you have any questions or suggestions, please contact us
numerique@gouv.bj
Follow us :
@numeriquebenin