Republic of Ghana National Artificial Intelligence Strategy:
2023-2033
To harness AI for inclusive growth across all sectors and to improve the lives of people in
Ghana, becoming a trailblazer for AI leadership in Africa and beyond.
Developed by the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation with Smart
Africa, GIZ FAIR Forward, and The Future Society (TFS)
October 2022
Photo by Ifeoluwa A. on Unsplash

Foreword

Table of Contents
List of Abbreviations 4
Executive Summary 5
Acknowledgements 9
Context 11
What is AI? 11
Mission and Vision Statements 12
Methodology 13
AI for Sustainable and Inclusive Development 14
Risks of AI 15
Diagnostic Assessment of Ghana’s AI Ecosystem - SWOT Analysis 17
National AI Strategy Framework 19
8 Pillars: Key Policy Recommendations 22
AI Adoption in Key Sectors 24
Driving Implementation: Ghana’s Responsible AI Office 25
Action Plan 26
Pillar 1: Expand AI Education 26
Pillar 2. Empower youth for jobs of the future 28
Pillar 3. Deepen digital infrastructure & inclusion 30
Pillar 4. Facilitate data access & governance 32
Pillar 5. Coordinate a robust AI community ecosystem 34
Pillar 6. Accelerate AI adoption across sectors 36
Pillar 7. Invest in Applied AI Research 37
Pillar 8: Promote AI Adoption in Public Sector 39
Appendix 1 - Booklet of AI Use Cases 41
AI in Healthcare in Ghana 42
AI in Smart Electricity Grid in Ghana 43
AI in Environment & Circular Economy in Ghana 43
AI in Transportation in Ghana 45
AI in Agriculture in Ghana 47
AI in Land & Natural Resources in Ghana 51
AI in Financial Services in Ghana 52
Appendix 2 - AI Ecosystem & Policy Analysis 55
Appendix 3 - Expert Contributors 99

List of Abbreviations
AfCFTA Africa Continental Free Trade Area
AI Artificial Intelligence
AI4D Artificial Intelligence for Development
AIMS African Institute of Mathematical Sciences
AITI-KACE Ghana-India Kofi Annan Centre of Excellence in ICT
AU African Union
AWS Amazon Web Services
BDC Bureau of National Communications
BoG Bank of Ghana
DFS Digital Financial Services
DTT Digital Terrestrial Television
ECG Electricity Company of Ghana
FDI Foreign direct investment
FTA Free-to-Air
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation (EU)
GIFEC Ghana Investment Fund for Electronic Communications
GIZ German Corporation for International Cooperation GmbH
GoG Government of Ghana
GRIDCO Ghana Grid Company Limited
GTL Ghana Tech Lab
IEAI Institute for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence
ICT Information and Communications Technology
ICT4AD ICT for Accelerated Development
ISP Internet Service Provider
IT Information Technology
KNUST Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MDAs Ministries, Departments and Agencies
MESTI Ministry of Environment, Science, Innovation & Technology
MMDAs Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies
ML Machine Learning
MoCD Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation
MoF/MoFEP Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MOOC Massive Open Online Course
NCA National Communications Authority
NITA National Information Technology Agency
NLP Natural language processing
PoC Proof of Concept
PPP Public-Private Partnership
PPPP Public-Private-People Partnership
PSSA Payment Systems and Services Act
SADA
Smart Africa Digital Academy
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SME
Small and medium-sized enterprise
STEM
Science, technology, engineering, maths
STI
Science, Technology, Innovation
SWOT
Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
TVET
Technical and Vocational Education and Training
TFS
The Future Society
UMaT
University of Mines and Technology
VRA
Volta River Authority
YEA
Youth Employment Agency

Executive Summary
Ghana's national, economic, and sustainable development objectives could be accelerated
through the application of artificial intelligence (AI). A national AI strategy that builds upon
existing digital policies and aligns key stakeholders will serve as a transformative catalyst for
Ghana's AI ecosystem and leadership position in Africa.
The Government of Ghana, through the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation, led the
development of Ghana's National AI Strategy, with support from GIZ FAIR Forward, Smart
Africa, and facilitation from The Future Society (TFS). The project is grounded in extensive
consultations with stakeholders and analysis of the country's AI and digital ecosystem and
policy landscape.
Mission: “To harness AI for inclusive growth across all sectors and to improve the lives of
people in Ghana, becoming a trailblazer for AI leadership in Africa and beyond.”
Vision "Ghana 2033: The Artificial Intelligence-Powered Society: By 2033, people living in
Ghana will experience a transformed society where AI advances the potential of people,
government, businesses and systems to achieve inclusive social and economic transformation
and quality of life. Ghanaians would have the capabilities and enabling environment to be
competitive in the global digital economy, positioning Ghana as an African AI hub.”
As described in Smart Africa’s Blueprint: Artificial Intelligence for Africa report1, AI brings major
opportunities to Africa to achieve sustainable growth and development. The expansion of digital
connectivity, the accumulation of more data, the development of more sophisticated algorithms,
and the increase in computing power are facilitating AI's technological advancements. Most AI
development and use is happening in advanced economies right now, but AI has a lot of
potential to change emerging economies as well. Ghana possesses a variety of advantages and
strengths that can be utilised to facilitate the development of a local Ghanaian AI ecosystem.
Nevertheless, as much as AI wields positive transformative power, it also poses risks that could
compromise security, safety, privacy, and human rights, as well as lead to biassed
decision-making and data abuse. It is imperative for Ghana to ensure a responsible, inclusive,
and sustainable AI ecosystem. Consequently, data governance and policy are essential for
fostering Ghana's AI ecosystem and mitigating its many risks.
The strategy document includes insights derived from a diagnostic assessment (SWOT
Analysis) that identifies significant opportunities and constraints that AI developers in Ghana
must contend with. The SWOT analysis revealed policy intervention areas required to
accelerate, enable, and scale Ghana's AI ecosystem. As such, it serves as the foundation for
policy recommendations centred on capitalising on the ecosystem's strengths, overcoming its
weaknesses and threats, and capitalising on unique opportunities.
1Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.

In addition, eight essential pillars for a responsible and inclusive AI ecosystem in Ghana were
established. Notably, these overlap with the pillars identified in the "AI for Africa Blueprint"
report by Smart Africa. 2
Furthermore, the strategy document (Appendix 1) explores practical use cases for the adoption
of AI in the real world that can boost productivity, efficiency, and outcomes in a number of critical
sectors of the Ghanaian economy.
Booklet of AI Use Cases in Ghana
2Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.

Key Recommendations
Pillar 1: Expand AI 1. Conduct an annual skills gap assessment.
Education & Training 2. Launch the “AI Ready Ghana” programme.
3. Expand the number of AI education courses available.
4. Promote training courses for teachers.
Pillar 2: Empower Youth 5. Facilitate remote jobs or internships in AI.
for AI Jobs of the Future 6. Develop tax incentives for youth in AI start-ups to promote employment.
7. Develop AI Fellowship programs.
8. Support continuous training and short courses for students and professionals
to enter the AI field.
Pillar 3: Deepen Digital 9. Review and identify gaps in the implementation of existing digital policies
Infrastructure & including development of national data centres.
Inclusion 10. Initiate mutual partnerships engagement with world-class cloud computing
providers for affordable access for AI start-ups in Ghana.
11. Orchestrate market dynamics that incentivise entrepreneurs to start
enterprises that focus on AI products and services.
Pillar 4: Facilitate Data 12. Disseminate and drive enforcement of existing data sharing & governance
Access & Governance policies.
13. Clarify data privacy and data sharing agreements and regulations for
partnerships.
14. Disseminate guidance on trustworthy, safe, secure and ethical AI practices to
AI developers and adopters.
15. Apply to international and regional AI governance platforms.
16. Rollout of the Ghana Open Data Initiative (GODI), the Ghana Data Exchange
Hub and data repositories.
Pillar 5: Coordinate a 17. Build & convene an online and in-person AI community.
Robust AI Ecosystem & 18. Expand and establish complementary physical or virtual AI innovation hubs
Community across the country, especially in marginalised communities, to promote
collaborations and knowledge sharing.
Pillar 6: Accelerate AI 19. Spark investment into AI adoption with 5 AI pilot projects from across key
Adoption in Key Sectors sectors.
20. Review and clarify laws for copyright, patents and intellectual property.
21. Implement incentives for AI start-ups, e.g. tax breaks for research &
development or employment.
Pillar 7: Invest in 22. Establish a Special Research Initiative to delve into climate-smart agriculture
Applied AI Research and forestry.
23. Establish a Natural Language Processing (NLP) Centre of Excellence (CoE).
24. Develop a framework for the establishment of a National Deep Science
Institute.
Pillar 8: Promote AI 25. Develop a program that increases access for digital & AI-focused start-ups to
Adoption in Public public procurement processes.
Sector

26. Evolve public sector mindset to view algorithms as IP and work with vendors
& start-ups to co-create IP in AI.
27. Establish a program to train civil & public servants to design, lead and
implement AI projects in public services.
28. Incentivise an AI culture by creating a reward system to encourage service
delivery excellence utilising AI.
29. Develop a comprehensive public administration data dashboard/interface to
provide data analytics for policy, planning, programme mix, resource allocation,
monitoring, and evaluation.
30. Initiate a programme to identify critical public service AI use-cases.
31. Develop a viable workflow and operational framework for public sector work
that takes into consideration agility and data-driven decision making.
The report concludes with a recommendation that a Responsible AI Office (RAI Office) be
established within the first year to lead the execution of the Ghana National AI Strategy. The RAI
Office shall be mandated with implementing the National AI Strategy by coordinating institutional
stakeholders and championing the responsible development and deployment of artificial
intelligence. Furthermore, the office will oversee ongoing monitoring and evaluation of the
progress of Ghana's AI efforts. The RAI Office will be established as an independent,
well-resourced institution tasked with driving implementation. This office is modelled on the
Singapore National AI Office (NAIO), the Egypt National AI Council, and the United Kingdom's
Office for AI.
Ghana has a momentous opportunity to build upon its burgeoning AI and digital ecosystem. By
launching the Responsible AI Office, coordinating key actors and driving action, the Government
of Ghana accelerates responsible and trustworthy AI adoption to achieve inclusive growth
across sectors, improving the lives of people in Ghana and becoming a trailblazer for AI
leadership in Africa and beyond.

Acknowledgements
Through the Data Protection Commission, the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation
collaborated with Smart Africa, GIZ FAIR Forward, and The Future Society (TFS) to develop the
Ghana National Artificial Intelligence Strategy. Numerous individuals and institutions contributed
to the project's completion in a variety of ways.
We are indebted to HE Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, President of the Republic of Ghana,
for his visionary leadership that paved the way for this AI strategy initiative. In addition, the Vice
President, HE Mahamudu Bawumia, is lauded for his office's contribution to the development of
the Ghana National AI Strategy and tireless efforts to drive the digital transformation agenda in
Ghana. In addition, the Minister of Communications and Digitalisation, Mrs. Ursula Owusu
Ekuful (MP), is commended for being a guiding light, providing resources, and championing
Ghana's artificial intelligence initiatives in the digital economy. Furthermore, the Deputy Minister
of Communication and Digitalisation, Ms Ama Pomaa Boateng (MP), has been very supportive
through her counsel, contributions, and welcoming presence throughout the development of this
strategy, and we express our gratitude to her. Similarly, we recognise the efforts of Ms. Paricia
Adusei-Poku, the Commissioner at the Data Protection Commission, who was a fundamental
and mobilising leader in the development of the strategy, ensuring that the environment,
cooperation, and personnel were always available throughout its development.
The project benefited from the leadership of the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation,
including Mrs. Magdalene Apenteng, who was the Chief Director of the Ministry at the beginning
of the project, and Mr. Alfred Nortey, who was the Director of Research at the Ministry. The
project team is represented by the Executive Director of the Ghana Data Protection
Commission, Patricia Adusei-Poku, Maxwell Ababio, and Abigail Yeboah. The FAIR Forward
project, a global initiative of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and
Development (BMZ) implemented by The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, was represented by Abraham Kuuku Sam, Jonas Gramse,
Emmanuel Mumuni, Mary Afram and Raphael Leuner. The knowledge partner is The Future
Society (TFS), led by Yolanda Lannquist, Nicolas Miailhe, Derrydean Dadzie, Robert Okine, and
Badrul Chowdhury. The Smart Africa Alliance participated with representation by Olivier
Gakwaya.
The working team benefited from consultation workshops and expert interviews with participants
from the Ghanaian government's Ministries, Departments, and Agencies, including the Vice
President's Office, the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation, the Data Protection
Commission, the National Information Technology Agency (NITA), the Ministry of Environment,
Science, Innovation, and Technology (MESTI), the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of
Transport, and the Ministry of Health.
The project additionally benefitted from stakeholder consultations and expert interviews with
participants representing the private sector, academia and civil society organisations, including

but not limited to the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, African Institute for Mathematical
Sciences (AIMS), University of Cape Coast, Kwame Nkrumah University for Science and
Technology (KNUST), the KNUST Responsible Artificial Intelligence Lab (RAIL), Responsible AI
Network (RAIN) Africa, Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications, Mozilla Foundation, NVIDIA,
Google AI, Ghana NLP, AmaliTech, Blossom Academy, Artificial Intelligence Association of
Ghana, Cyst, mPharma, MinoHealth, Karagro AI, Developers in Vogue, Microsoft, Women in
Machine Learning and Data Science (WiMLDS), in addition to Ghanaian AI practitioners,
engineers and PhD researchers.

Context
The application of artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to accelerate Ghana's movement
toward achieving its economic and sustainable development goals (SDGs). The National AI
Strategy of Ghana functions as a comprehensive roadmap that enables the country to capitalise
on AI's socio-economic benefits while simultaneously mitigating its hazards. Artificial intelligence
can boost human and economic development across Ghana in line with its national objectives,
as well as progress towards the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Despite this, there are significant ethical dangers and practical obstacles
associated with using AI, even though its opportunities are enormous. Expanding on digital
policies and aligning key stakeholders, a national AI strategy and action plan will establish
Ghana’s regional AI ecosystem and leadership.
The Ghanaian government, acting through the Ministry of Communications and Digitalization,
has been the driving force behind the creation of the country's National Artificial Intelligence
Strategy. This work has been made possible with assistance from GIZ FAIR Forward and Smart
Africa, and it has been facilitated by The Future Society (TFS). The project required close
coordination with the government of Ghana, which was represented by the Data Protection
Commission (DPC) at the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation. Additionally, the
initiative engaged stakeholders from the local, regional, and international levels. Consequently,
the National AI Strategy will position Ghana as a leader and harness AI for sustainable and
inclusive growth, laying the groundwork for the future of the nation and the continent.
To date, the majority of African nations have yet to bring AI and digital technology
advancements to policy tables. However, there is renewed impetus by some African countries
such as Ghana, Rwanda, Kenya, Mauritius, South Africa, Tunisia, Morocco and Egypt to set the
wheels of change in motion.3 Smart Africa’s Blueprint: Artificial Intelligence for Africa report4
presents key elements and advice for national AI strategies and international coordination in
Africa.
What is AI?
AI broadly refers to “an array of technologies relying on algorithms at their core to ‘think’ or ‘act’
towards solving a problem. AI includes tasks such as learning, reasoning, planning, perception,
language understanding, and robotics.”5 Machine learning (ML) is the sub-set of AI which has
garnered the most traction and enthusiasm in recent years, creating opportunities for rapid AI
developments and applications.
3https://oecd.ai/en/dashboardsand The Future Society.
4Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.
5 Russell, Stuart (2016) "Q&A: The Future of Artificial Intelligence". University of California, Berkeley.
http://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~russell/temp/q-and-a.html.

AI includes many applications to improve outcomes and efficiency across sectors. These
include, for example, language translation and customer service chat bots; prediction &
optimization of electricity usage; autonomous vehicles & bus routes; facial recognition
check-ins; predictive medical diagnoses for disease or triage; robotic process automation for
businesses; virtual home voice assistants; analysis of satellite imagery to predict deforestation
or agriculture outcomes; drone imaging for precision agriculture; algorithmic predictions for
credit scoring or fraud detection; image classification for reading and digitising written text, and
much more.
Mission and Vision Statements
Mission statement
To harness AI for inclusive growth across all sectors and to improve the lives of people in
Ghana, becoming a trailblazer for AI leadership in Africa and beyond.
Vision statement
Ghana 2033: The AI-powered society:
By 2033, people living in Ghana will experience a transformed society where AI advances the
potential of people, government, businesses and systems to achieve inclusive social and
economic transformation and quality of life. Ghanaians would have the capabilities and enabling
environment to be competitive in the global digital economy, positioning Ghana as an African AI
hub.

Methodology
Ghana's National AI Strategy is grounded in stakeholder consultations and analysis of the
country's AI and digital ecosystem and policy landscape (Appendix 2). Around 40 expert
interviews were conducted with key actors and institutions in Ghana’s AI ecosystem from the
public sector, academia, start-ups and private sector and civil society, complemented by four
high-level public sector consultation workshops.
The research involved deep engagement of stakeholders and in-depth cross-sectoral analysis
of the AI ecosystem's strengths, needs, opportunities and challenges. Findings are presented in
a SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats) analysis, which identifies the most
urgent areas for reform to enable Ghana’s AI ecosystem to flourish responsibly and inclusively.
Background research also incorporates African and international emerging practices in AI policy
based on benchmarks of various international AI strategies. A sectoral approach provides
concrete examples of AI applications in key sectors in Ghana (Appendix 1 - Booklet of AI Use
Cases in Ghana).
Public sector consultations and workshops were conducted to shape and prioritise actionable
policy recommendations. An initial workshop in March 2022 with steering committee members
defined mission and vision statements. Subsequent in-person and virtual public sector
consultation workshops took place from May to October 2022.

AI for Sustainable and Inclusive Development
Around the world, AI is becoming increasingly pervasive in our lives as a "general-purpose
technology." As described in Smart Africa’s Blueprint: Artificial Intelligence for Africa report6, AI
brings major opportunities to Africa to achieve sustainable growth and development.
Technological advancements in AI are being enabled by greater digital connectivity, increasing
amounts of data, advanced algorithms, and gains in computing power. While most AI
development and applications are currently in advanced economies, AI also has great potential
to transform emerging economies.
Smart Africa’s Blueprint: Artificial Intelligence for Africa report presents various AI applications
and opportunities for African countries, from agriculture, education, health, financial services,
energy and transportation and climate change. Similarly, the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI)
has identified numerous applications of AI to help combat climate change and support the
environment.7 International research identifies numerous use cases across sustainable
development goals.8 This report provides concrete examples of AI applications in key sectors in
Ghana (Appendix 1 - AI Use Cases in Ghana).
AI can be a launch pad for Africa to make a paradigm shift to more efficient, optimal and
transparent delivery of public services and infrastructure development. For example, in the
healthcare sector, structural inequalities, shortages of qualified healthcare professionals or
supplies, barriers to accessibility, affordability and rural and urban divides raise critical gaps that
AI can help address.9 Investing in digital technologies, including AI, will prepare Africa to
generate new economies and contribute and compete in a global economy. Strategic adoption
of advanced digital technologies such as AI can provide employment opportunities for the youth
and opportunities for the continent’s innovators and entrepreneurs to plug into global value
chains.
While the responsible adoption of AI has the potential to help the country by driving inclusive
economic advancement, Ghana has not yet taken full advantage. The African continent as a
whole still lags behind. A measure of Oxford Insights’ governments' readiness for AI adoption
revealed that the African continent scored the lowest on average. Moreover, few countries in the
region have set out their vision for the implementation of AI.10 Generally, African countries lack
6Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.
7Global Partnership on AI, Climate Change and AI,
https://www.gpai.ai/projects/climate-change-and-ai.pdf
8“Applying AI for Social Good | McKinsey.” n.d. Accessed August 28, 2019.
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/applying-artificial-intelligence-for-social-g
ood;Vinuesa, R. et al (2019) The role of artificialintelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, online: https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1905/1905.00501.pdf .
9 Lannquist, Y., 2021, “Opportunities & Challenges of AI in Healthcare in Africa,” The Future Society.
https://thefuturesociety.org/2021/07/22/opportunities-challenges-of-ai-in-healthcare-in-africa/
10 Oxford Insights and the International Development Research Centre. (2020). Government Artificial 2
Intelligence Readiness Index 2020. https://www.oxfordinsights.com/government-ai-readinessindex-2020

the preparedness to harness the tools that widespread adoption of AI would bring to solve many
of the continent's most pressing social and economic challenges.11
Nonetheless, Ghana has numerous advantages and strengths that can be harnessed to enable
a local Ghanaian AI ecosystem. For example, some notable AI activities in Ghana have
stemmed from the setting up of Google's first AI centre in Africa in Accra. For Ghana to take
advantage of its burgeoning AI community, supporting and developing a responsible AI
ecosystem with long-term benefits is critical. While AI development is rapid, adoption and
upscaling across markets are still at an early stage, and much of its value is yet to be tapped.
Thus, Ghana has a window of opportunity to harness AI for inclusive growth, sustainable
development and well-being.
Risks of AI
However, the opportunities of AI are connected with substantial ethical and societal risks,
including bias, discrimination and lack of transparency & explainability in algorithmic outcomes,
widening inequality gaps, cybersecurity, privacy and safety concerns, and gaps in inclusion and
data governance. These require developing innovative AI governance, carefully balanced by
ethical guidelines for responsible AI adoption.
AI systems can widen already existing inequalities and exclusion. Gaps in digital inclusion in
rural areas and other demographic groups mean that certain populations are underrepresented
in AI systems and unable to benefit from them. Meanwhile, Ghana suffers from a systematic
lack of accurate and high quality data collection. Model bias can result in less accurate
outcomes that are unsafe and unfairly discriminate against underrepresented groups. Currently,
algorithmic bias can occur on data and models from foreign contexts that do not fit Ghana’s
contexts.
Personal data is vulnerable to violations in privacy or security during data collection, sharing,
processing and storage. Furthermore, AI-generated realistic text, audio and video (‘deep fakes’)
and personalised disinformation campaigns can manipulate, persuade and deceive citizens.
Meanwhile, the lack of transparency and explainability in some AI systems (e.g. neural networks
and deep learning) makes it difficult to detect bias, audit and trust AI systems, and hold them
accountable. As more and more basic and vital services will be based on AI and digital
technologies, these service systems have a new and increased vulnerability. Moreover, AI can
be used for social harm, citizen surveillance and infringe on individual privacy.
The AI economy can provide both job opportunities and losses across skill levels. From data
collection and labelling to applied research, people in Ghana can participate in the global AI
value chains. However, if the population is not prepared, automation of tasks in jobs can result
in job losses. It is important to “future-proof” Ghana’s workforce by preparing them for future AI
and digital jobs.
11https://ircai.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/AI4D_Report_Responsible_AI_in_SSA.pdf

It is imperative for Ghana to ensure a responsible, inclusive and sustainable AI ecosystem. As
much as AI wields positive transformative power, it has the potential to infringe on human rights
and lead to biased decision-making and misuse of data. To this end, data governance and
policy are key to driving Ghana's AI ecosystem while mitigating its many risks.

Diagnostic Assessment of Ghana’s AI Ecosystem -
SWOT Analysis
Strengths Weaknesses
● Vibrant and growing digital, e-commerce and ● Low awareness about opportunities and value of
innovation start-up ecosystem, including AI adoption, resulting in low demand for local AI
accelerators and innovation hubs (E.g. Ghana projects and few job opportunities to develop
NLP, Mazzuma, Artificial Intelligence Association human capital
of Ghana) ● Skills gap and lack of appreciation or low
● Digital connectivity expansion including the political will among government actors to drive
availability of internet in urban areas (e.g. 800km AI development.
fibre optic cables, submarine gateways via ● Lack of coordination and collaboration among
Eastern Corridor) actors in the AI ecosystem, including AI projects
● Local digital hubs (e.g. Accra Digital Centre AI in universities, companies, and across public
Lab) and business-friendly environment for sector institutions
international investment (i.e. Anglophone market, ● Limited access and low affordability of, reliable
political stability and security, academic electricity, high-speed internet and IT
institutions, solid internet infrastructure, ease of infrastructure, including cloud computing
visas) infrastructure and data centres for
● Growing international investment in AI and the high-performance computing
digital landscape (e.g. Google, Twitter, Glovo) ● Low digital skills & literacy and smartphone
● Presence of supportive global actors such as penetration in rural areas are barriers to AI
Tony Blair Institute for Global Change and Kofi adoption in SMEs
Annan Centre (AITI-KACE) ● Insufficient local digitised datasets that are
● Hub in the West African sub-region is able to accurate, updated, and representative.
attract talent and lead by example ● Data is inaccessible across sectors. Lack of
● Relatively strong availability of university standard practices in data digitization, collection,
graduates equipped with fundamental skills in and sharing; data is siloed in sectors
computer science, data analysis, mathematics ● Low awareness, compliance and enforcement of
and other relevant courses data privacy and cybersecurity policies &
● Young and fast-growing population with a strong governance; telecommunications policies that do
drive to advance and improve the country not align well with disruptions and new trends in
through AI and emerging technologies the sector
● Existence of robust national vision, policies and ● Public scepticism and the need to demystify AI
objectives towards digital, ICT and innovation trends, including impact on jobs.
(e.g. Ghana Digital Economy Policy, Ghana ● Limited availability of university professors,
Integrated Digital Transformation Blueprint) funding, and courses in AI; skills gaps and
● Championing data governance, digital insufficient number of talent with data science
development and e-payments in Africa and more advanced AI skills
● The expansion of the market to the Africa ● Gaps in internet coverage and lack of 5G. 4G
Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) with penetration at 41% on average in rural areas
headquarters in Ghana compared to 88% in urban areas
● Lack of access to venture capital and traditional
bank loans limit access to financing for start-ups
● Lack of large-scale, local AI projects by industry
or local digital hubs

Opportunities Threats
● Leverage the growing, vibrant digital ecosystem, ● Lack of coordination and investment in
talent pool and international investment (e.g. implementing the National AI Strategy resulting
Google, Twitter) for Ghana to become a hub and in a failure of the AI ecosystem to take off,
launchpad for AI solutions in the region and limiting Ghana’s competitiveness in the global
continent digital economy
● Adopting AI tools can drive inclusion, outcomes ● Low accessibility and inclusion in AI adoption
and efficiency gains across sectors, including due to gaps in digital skills and literacy in SMEs
healthcare, transportation, energy, agriculture, and rural areas
education and public services ● Risk of failures, errors and discrimination due to
● Professionals access remote international AI job lower accuracy of AI models trained on foreign
opportunities to grow skills, employment, and data not fit for local context, and
support the local AI community underrepresentation in digital inclusion and AI
● Growing niche in natural language processing development
(NLP) AI methods, including collection and ● Loss of data privacy, security and public trust
labelling of local languages for translation due to misuse of data or limited guidance,
solutions and chatbots across sectors legislation and compliance for trustworthy AI
● Skills and employment across the AI value chain adoption
and skills levels by training students in data ● Lack of coordination and implementation in
science, data labelling and collection, data existing policies results in inefficient and
centre infrastructure and cloud services, underutilization of resources
cybersecurity, machine learning research and ● Potential for job loss or unemployment in
product development traditional jobs due to changing skills demand
and automation
● Brain drain of AI talent due to opportunities
abroad
● Limited long-term sustainability of initiatives
financed by donor partners.
A diagnostic assessment (SWOT Analysis) identifies important opportunities and constraints
that AI developers face in Ghana. It identifies the areas requiring policy interventions to
accelerate, enable and scale Ghana’s AI ecosystem. As such, it is the foundational knowledge
base for policy recommendations to harness Ghana’s strengths, overcome its weaknesses and
threats, and ultimately take advantage of important opportunities for an AI ecosystem.

National AI Strategy Framework
The framework includes eight key pillars to enable a responsible and inclusive AI ecosystem in
Ghana. Several of the pillars overlap with the five pillars identified in Smart Africa’s "AI for
Africa" Blueprint report: Human capital, From Lab to Market, Networking, Infrastructure, and
Regulation.12
Pillar 1: Expand AI Education & Training
In an era of rapid technological and economic changes, it is essential to equip people in Ghana
with the skills to survive and thrive - now and in the future. This pillar develops AI talent by
increasing the number of graduates with AI and machine learning, data science, data
engineering, computer science, and practical technical skills (e.g. data preparation, data
collection and labelling). By increasing AI talent, individuals and the nation can participate in the
global AI and digital economy. Inclusive education programmes in rural areas and women are
essential to diversifying the AI field. Furthermore, this pillar prepares the workforce for an
evolving labour market and skills requirements.
Pillar 2: Empower Youth for AI Jobs of the Future
Youth employment is a key national objective. Youth in Ghana have opportunities to participate
in the AI value chain, in Ghana and at international levels. Across skill and education levels,
youth can participate in data collection, labelling, applied data science, machine learning
research and beyond. In doing so, they create local home-grown datasets and AI solutions fit for
12Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.

the context. Youth can participate in a growing global digital and AI economy while staying
within Ghana and contributing to its economy and AI community in either remote or local AI
projects. Increasing opportunities for the youth of Ghana to learn and develop in-demand skills
helps future-proof Ghana’s competitiveness, prevent brain drain and job displacement from
automation.
Pillar 3: Deepen Digital Infrastructure & Inclusion
Reliable digital infrastructure and digital inclusion are fundamental for robust and inclusive AI in
Ghana. This pillar enables greater access to internet and digital infrastructure, hardware and
cloud computing services. Internet penetration is incomplete, particularly in rural areas, and
poses challenges in terms of affordability and reliability with consequences for inclusion.
Similarly, access to international world-class cloud service providers is unaffordable for AI
start-ups, students and practitioners. International cloud providers offer compute capabilities that
are unmatched by domestic options in terms of reliability, quality, efficiency, security and
scalability. A path to affordable access to world-class compute for AI/ICT start-ups and
companies while mitigating risks related to security and privacy is necessary. In parallel, Ghana
will prepare to build a national cloud infrastructure with AI-ready storage and compute capacity
serving the region and the continent.
Pillar 4: Facilitate Data Access & Governance
Access and availability of accurate and quality data are critical for AI. Ghana requires collecting
and labelling more local data sets to support home-grown local AI solutions fit for the context.
Despite existing data policies, institutions are largely unprepared to responsibly share data
across organisations or with AI researchers and practitioners. Implementation and compliance
with data privacy laws, cybersecurity and governance frameworks are necessary to facilitate
access to data across institutions and providers while safeguarding citizens’ privacy, safety,
security and rights. Governance is needed to protect people in Ghana against risks presented
by AI and create an enabling environment for trustworthy innovation.
Pillar 5: Coordinate a Robust AI Ecosystem & Community
While Ghana has a growing AI ecosystem, including strong AI start-ups, practitioners and
university research programs (Appendix 2), the community is not in regular communication and
therefore does not benefit from knowledge sharing and collaborations. Coordination of the AI
community in events, meetups, projects, conferences and beyond can foster shared skills
development, collaborative projects, and synergies to grow the AI ecosystem. AI practitioners
can identify project partners and resources and coordinate toward exemplary and successful
projects. A coordinated community also supports talent retention in Ghana.
Pillar 6: Accelerate AI Adoption in Key Sectors
The private sector plays a vital role in scaling up AI adoption across the economy and society.
This pillar aims to accelerate the application of AI to boost productivity and outcomes in key
sectors and AI entrepreneurship. Exemplary successful pilot projects can raise interest in AI
applications across sectors, such as healthcare, agriculture, transportation, energy, financial
services, and the environment. Numerous actors in Ghana’s AI ecosystem are identifying use

cases to add value and address local challenges in these sectors. It is important to raise
awareness and demystify AI to spark interest and investment in pilot projects.
With more projects available, local AI talent gain practical skills and job opportunities and are
likely to stay in Ghana and contribute to the local economy. Notably, partnerships and
coordination with public sector institutions and universities for sectoral applications are crucial to
synergize in R&D, data, funding, and logistics to achieve scalability. This report provides
concrete examples of AI applications in key sectors in Ghana (Appendix 1 - Booklet of AI Use
Cases in Ghana).
Pillar 7: Invest in Applied AI Research
Ghana’s AI ecosystem should be future-oriented and able to drive value and progress towards
local challenges and sustainable development. Rather than adopting technologies primarily
made in foreign countries, local research into deep tech and applications is best able to address
the country’s unique challenges and contribute toward African and international outcomes. This
pillar focuses on applied research concerning AI applications in key sectors, such as agriculture,
health, the environment, and deep science. It seeks to build on Ghana’s existing strengths, such
as natural language processing (NLP) within academic and corporate institutions.
Pillar 8: Promote AI Adoption in the Public Sector
This pillar aims to support public sector leadership in the responsible and ethical adoption of AI.
AI brings opportunities to improve quality and access to goods and services through a large
number of use cases across public services, from administration and planning to healthcare,
transportation, education, and beyond. Performance and efficiency gains through the application
of AI technologies can help overcome shortages of resources. Public sector leadership can set
an example and drive demand for AI in the economy through public procurement and PPPs that
are open to AI start-ups and innovative companies. Importantly, cross-sector collaboration and
standardisation in operational models across institutions will ensure uniformity. Skills building
and training across the public sector are important to build capacity for responsible and ethical
AI adoption across Ghana.

8 Pillars: Key Policy Recommendations
Pillar 1: Expand AI Education & 1. Conduct an annual skills gap assessment.
Training 2. Launch the “AI Ready Ghana” program
3. Expand education courses in AI
4. Promote training courses for teachers
Pillar 2: Empower Youth for AI 5. Facilitate remote jobs or internships in AI
Jobs of the Future 6. Develop tax incentives for youth in AI start-ups to promote
employment
7. Develop AI Fellowship programs
8. Support continuous training and short courses for students and
professionals to enter the AI field
Pillar 3: Deepen Digital 9. Review and identify gaps in the implementation of existing digital
Infrastructure & Inclusion policies including development of national data centres
10. Initiate mutual partnerships engagement with world-class cloud
computing providers for affordable access for AI start-ups in Ghana
11. Orchestrate market dynamics that incentivise entrepreneurs to start
enterprises that focus on AI products and services
Pillar 4: Facilitate Data Access 12. Disseminate and drive enforcement of existing data sharing &
& Governance governance policies
13. Clarify data privacy and data sharing agreements and regulations
for partnerships
14. Disseminate guidance on trustworthy, safe, secure and ethical AI
practices to AI developers and adopters
15. Apply to international and regional AI governance platforms
16. Rollout of the Ghana Open Data Initiative (GODI), the Ghana Data
Exchange Hub and data repositories
Pillar 5: Coordinate a Robust AI 17. Build & convene an online and in-person AI community
Ecosystem & Community 18. Expand and establish complementary physical or virtual AI
innovation hubs across the country, especially in marginalised
communities, to promote collaborations and knowledge sharing
Pillar 6: Accelerate AI Adoption 19. Spark investment into AI adoption with 5 AI pilot projects from
in Key Sectors across key sectors
20. Review and clarify laws for copyright, patents and intellectual
property
21. Implement incentives for AI start-ups, e.g. tax breaks for research
& development or employment
Pillar 7: Invest in Applied AI 22. Establish a Special Research Initiative to delve into climate-smart
Research agriculture and forestry
23. Establish a Natural Language Processing (NLP) Centre of
Excellence (CoE)
24. Develop a framework for the establishment of a National Deep
Science Institute

Pillar 8: Promote AI Adoption in 25. Develop a program that increases access for digital & AI-focused
Public Sector start-ups to public procurement processes
26. Evolve public sector mindset to view algorithms as IP and work
with vendors & start-ups to co-create IP in AI
27. Establish a program to train civil & public servants to design, lead
and implement AI projects in public services
28. Incentivise an AI culture by creating a reward system to encourage
service delivery excellence utilising AI
29. Develop a comprehensive public administration data
dashboard/interface to provide data analytics for policy, planning,
programme mix, resource allocation, monitoring, and evaluation
30. Initiate a programme to identify critical public service AI use-cases
31. Develop a viable workflow and operational framework for public
sector work that takes into consideration agility and data-driven
decision making

AI Adoption in Key Sectors
AI adoption can support productivity, efficiency and outcomes in a number of critical sectors of
the country. Examples of concrete AI applications are outlined in Appendix 1- Booklet of AI Use
Cases in Ghana.
Target Sectors for AI Adoption
Healthcare
Agriculture
Transportation
Energy
Financial Services
Lands and Natural Resources
Environment and Circular Economy

Driving Implementation: Ghana’s Responsible AI Office
This report recommends establishing a Responsible AI Office (RAI Office) during the first year to
spearhead implementation of the Ghana National AI Strategy. The RAI Office shall be mandated
to implement the National AI Strategy by coordinating stakeholders across institutions and
championing AI's responsible development and deployment. Coordination of ongoing monitoring
and progress measurements will also fall under the purview of the office. The RAI Office is to be
established as an independent, well-resourced entity mandated to drive implementation. To
support its launch, the Data Protection Commission may act as a nurturing enclave and
incubator to form the institution and position it to acquire the necessary capacity for its mandate.
This office follows several international examples, such as the Singapore National AI Office
(NAIO), Egypt National AI Council, and the United Kingdom’s Office for AI. To be confirmed as
part of the RAI Office's preliminary activities are:
1. Develop agenda to ensure legislative enablement, cross-sectoral regulatory
alignment and cross-agency operational standardisation.
2. Coordinate across institutions to implement the National AI Strategy, involving
government ministries and agencies, the private sector, academia and civil society, with
an added dimension to ensure AI initiatives are useful and valuable to people and
businesses. Responsible for leading several national AI strategy recommendations.
3. Lead quarterly monitoring, measurement, and iteration of the National AI Strategy,
including identifying responsible actors, drawing up budgets, undertaking gap analyses,
and reviewing, collating and updating emerging technology trends in Ghana and abroad.
4. Conduct deeper analyses for market sizing opportunities for AI across sectors.
5. Develop context-relevant indices such as a Ghana AI Readiness Index and toolkit to
position Ghana, set goals & targets, measure progress and attract investment. Learn
from international examples such as Rwanda’s AI Readiness Index or The Global Index
on Responsible AI.
6. Actively participate in the global governance of AI platforms such as Global
Partnership on AI or OECD Working Party on Artificial Intelligence Governance (AIGO)
to shape international AI policy and learn from countries’ practices. With Smart Africa
and GIZ FAIR Forward, participate in peer learning in the Africa-Asia AI Policy Maker
Network. Following examples, such as Egypt’s National Artificial Intelligence Strategy,
coordinate with international organisations (e.g. Smart Africa, African Union).
It is strongly suggested that The RAI Office be equipped with a public-facing internet portal that
displays its activities and agenda and facilitates community debates. The RAI Office will be
evaluated over the course of three years with the goal of transforming it into a full commission
as a means of affirming the government's ambition, AI leadership, and commitment to becoming
Africa's AI hub.

Action Plan
Pillar 1: Expand AI Education
Outcome Recommendation Activities Actor(s) Year
A pool of talent Annual AI skills 1. Conduct an annual skills gap assessment. MOCD, Ministry of Education, 2023
ready to work in AI gap assessment The National Council for
● Conductabaselinestudytoidentifythecurrentneeds Curriculum and Assessment
and availability of talent with specific skills and (NACCA), Ghana Technology
competencies for AI in the labour market to inform and Business Hubs
curricula in schools and universities.
Associations, Ghana Tertiary
● Develop a framework for a 5-yearly baseline
Education Council,
assessment and adjustment for AI skills and capacity.
● Consultations with associations and institutions e.g. MESTI, AITI-KACE, National
MESTI’s Strategic Technology Centre & Decade of Accreditation Board,
Innovation strategy, TVET, COTVET, and Association universities (e.g. KNUST,
of Ghana Industries to build a database of industry Ashesi University,
skill demands. University of Cape Coast,
University of Ghana, AIMS,
Academic City University
College)
“AI Ready Ghana” 2. Launch the “AI Ready Ghana” program MoCD with Ministry of 2023
program to Education, Ghana Education
train students ● Launch an Initiative that aims to trainover1,000,000 Services, Ghana Tertiary
AI-readyyouthby2033.TheInitiativewouldensureAI Education Council, National
training for youth in the first year of high school Youth Authority (NYA)
through their last years in tertiary education.
● Update existing STEM and IT curricula in secondary
education to incorporate practical coding and AI
skills, basics of data ethics, data protection and data
science, and raise awareness about jobs in AI and
digital fields.
● Prepare students by incorporating the basics of data
science and coding in primary education.
● Develop a digital counselling and career advisory
framework to guide young people on career choices

in the digital economy. Such a framework should be
implemented across all secondary and tertiary
institutions through their career counselling units or
departments where they exist. Where such offices do
not exist, steps shall be taken to establish one.
AI education 3. Expand education courses in AI Ministry of Education, Ghana 2023
courses Tertiary Education Council
● Coordinate amonguniversitiestocreateadatabaseof
existing universities, technical universities and
vocational training courses and degree programs in
machine learning, artificial intelligence, data science,
data engineering, cloud and database management,
etc. For example, begin with a degree and coursesat
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology’sResponsibleAILaboratory(KNUST-RAIL),
African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS),
Academic City, AshesiUniversity,UniversityofGhana,
Academic City University College.
● The database shall also includeresourcesavailableto
such programmes (e.g. teachers, hardware).
Additionally, the database shall take stock of specific
policies and clauses in related policies that have
linkages to these programmes.
● Based on the annual AI skills gap assessment, plan
the rollout of additional modules, courses or degree
programs in AI to beintegratedintorelevantsubjects
(e.g. computer science, statistics, mathematics,
physics, biology).
● With tertiary education institutions, develop a planto
attract lecturers and research programs in AI. Build
upon existing institutions attracting foreign experts
such as AIMS or the first Master Sponsored Research
AgreementsinAfricabetweenGooglewithKNUSTand
AIMS to enable research and leadership-sponsored
programs developing young tech talent in Africa.
AI teacher training 4. Promote training courses for teachers MoCD with Ministry of 2023
& upskilling Education, Ghana Education
● Work with Ghana Education Services (GES) ICT Services, Ghana Tertiary
coordinators to train teachers. Consider existing Education Council, SADA,
programs such as the Smart Africa Digital Academy AIMS
(SADA) and AIMS’ online hybridcourseforteachersin
mathematics.

Pillar 2. Empower youth for jobs of the future
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
EquipGhana’syouth Remote AI job 5. Facilitate remote jobs or internships in AI Responsible AI Office, 2024
to participate in the opportunities universities, AI training
global AI anddigital ● Enable local students or professionals to build providers
economy, raising competitive skills while contributing to Ghana’s AI
employment and community through internships, on-the-job training,
future-proofing jobs hackathons, hubs and incubator engagements.Whilejob
for the future opportunities in AI are currently limited, locally based
practitioners can gain employment and skills while
contributing to community building in Ghana (Pillar 5)
and local projects or companies at a later stage.
Internships are an important part of training to develop
practical skills.
● Review programs which train youth and place them in
local and international jobs (e.g. AmaliTech, Blossom
Academy).
● Incubation and innovation centres in the universities to
support talented youth with start-ups and remote jobs.
● Leverage Ghanaian diplomatic missions to facilitate and
highlight AI remote jobs for youth in Ghana.
● Expand the TVET voucher programme to include
dedicated modules for digital skills of vocational
trainees.
Tax incentives for 6. Develop tax incentives for youth in AI start-ups to MoCD, Ministry For Business 2024
youth in AI promote employment Development, Ministry of
Finance, Ghana Revenue
● Review thegapsinexistingtaxprogrammesforbusiness Authority
and develop a new framework for incentivising youth
entrepreneurship in the digital economy with an
additional dispensation for AI start-ups.
● GRA may engage beneficiaries of tax benefits to solve
specified revenue mobilisation challenges.

AI Fellowships 7. Develop AI Fellowship programs Responsible AI Office, Accra 2024
Digital Centre, MoCD, Youth
● Design and run programmes to support applied and Employment Agency
practical AI skills development in internships and
projects in the public and private sectors.
● These programmes should be housed in the various
regional ICT centres or hubs (Pillar 5), including
ecosystemsoutsideofAccra.DevelopKPIsandmetricsto
track the number of participants and job outcomes.
● Coordinate with the Girls-in-ICT annual initiative by the
MOCD for the inclusion of women in AI.
● Target projects addressing specific problems in Ghana,
such as projects with the Bank of Ghana’s sandbox
programtotestinnovativeideas.Includeprojectsinrural
areas to build inclusion.
Continuous 8. Support continuous training and short courses for Responsible AI Office 2024
training & students and professionals to enter the AI field
short courses
in AI ● Provide financial grants and tax incentives or share
program information with the AI community for training
(Pillar 5).
● Learn from the TVET-KFW training model to facilitate AI
training for youth. Begin with examplessuchasBlossom
Academy, Ghana Tech Lab’s National AI Training
Programme or 3-week National FemalePre-TechTraining
Programme, Developers in Vogue, and free coursessuch
as Microsoft Open Education or Hacklab Foundation,
which integrates training with hackathons.
● Publicise courses across the AI value chain rangingfrom
data science and machine learning to technical and
vocational training for data collection and labelling,
cloud services/database management, and cybersecurity.

Pillar 3. Deepen digital infrastructure & inclusion
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
Accessible & Implementation of 9. Review and identify gaps in the implementation of MoCD, Ghana Chamber of 2023
inclusive digital existing digital existing digital policies including development of Telecommunications,
infrastructurein development policies national data centres AITI-KACE
Ghana
I.e. Ghana Integrated ICT for Accelerated Development Policy
(ICT4AD), e-Transform Project, Ghana Digital Economy Policy,
and Ghana Integrated Digital Transformation Blueprint,
including a focusonruralareastoensureinclusion.Harmonise
and integrate existing policies into a comprehensive plan
across agencies and institutions. In addition, prioritise
improving the affordability and reliability of high-speed
internet across Ghana and developing national data centres.
● Deepen co-creation and private-public partnership in
digital infrastructure funding, development,
deployment and utilisation, including to support
national data centres.
● Design a policy bridging frameworkacrossagenciesto
ensure that policies are responsive to the broader
national development agenda, servingtheneedsofthe
people in a holistic manner, synergizing and ensuring
non-duplication to optimise the use of budgets and
resources. A policy bridging framework is the set of
tools, models, governance approaches and protocols
that different policies have to subscribe to ensure
policy synergies, visibility and resource optimisation
across sectors and agencies.

Competitive AI Plan for affordable 10. Initiate mutual partnerships engagement with MoCD, Google, NVIDIA, and 2024
start-ups with access to world-class cloud computing providers for affordable other cloud service providers.
access to world-classcloud access for AI start-ups in Ghana
world-class computing
high-performan ● Lead discussions with world-class cloud computing
ce compute providers (e.g. NVIDIA, Google Cloud,MicrosoftAzure,
capacity Amazon Web Services) toprovidecreditsandsubsidies
for AI or digital start-ups across Ghana, enabling
start-ups to overcome barriers inaffordabilityandcost
to access competitive cloud computing. Build upon
frameworks from existing examples such as NVIDIA’s
offer to start-ups (NVIDIA Inception Premier Members)
or Google’s Black Founders Fund, or research
partnerships with universities.
● Explore incentive opportunities to attract local
entrepreneurs and investors to develop local cloud
computing infrastructure.
Robust AI Coordinate and 11. Orchestrate market dynamics that incentivise MOCD, NITA, NCA, DPC, GIFEC, 2023
start-up facilitate viable entrepreneurs to start enterprises that focus on AI Ghana Enterprise Agency,
ecosystem innovation and products and services Chamber of Technology, Ghana
AI markets Chamber of
● The government, through its ICT-oriented agencies, Telecommunications
should work together to initiate strong market-led
policy initiatives that:
i. Clarify market conduct issues
ii. Ease market entry
iii. Establish enabling permissible segments
to grow local AI enterprises

Pillar 4. Facilitate data access & governance
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
Regulatory clarity Implementation of 12. Disseminate and drive enforcement of existing data MoCD, DPC, Cyber Security 2023
and compliance data sharing & sharing & governance policies Authority
in theAI&digital governance policies
ecosystems to Review and complete implementation of existingpoliciesindata
promote protection and cybersecurity, e.g. National Data Sharing Policy
innovation and (NDSP); DataProtectionAct,2012(Act843);RighttoInformation
uphold privacy, Act 2019 Act 843; Cybersecurity Act 2020;CyberSecurityPolicy
security, and & Strategy 2015; Digital Financial Services (DFS) Policy; Health
ethics Sector ICT Policy and Strategy 2005, Electronic Transaction Act
● Ensureindustry-wideandcross-sectoralengagementand
education to ensure uniformity
● Create an advocacy and dissemination plan to educate,
drive awareness and deepen the utilisation of these
policies.
Regulatoryclarityfor 13. Clarify data privacy and data sharingagreementsand MoCD, DPC, Cyber Security 2023
data sharing in PPPs regulations for partnerships Authority
in AI
Build trust and transparency through national data sharing
agreements, which would be championed and supervised bythe
DPC for all public & private institutions. This enables data
holders to share data with AI project partners and start-ups
across sectors, including public and private sectors, telcos and
start-ups in PPPs.
Trustworthy, AI Ethical Guidelines 14. Disseminate guidance on trustworthy, safe, secure DPC, NITA, Cyber Security 2023
safe, secure and and tools for AI and ethical AI practices to AI developers and adopters Authority
ethical AI developers
applications in ● Based on existing work at DPC on the ethical use of AI,
Ghana equip AI practitioners in the private sector and
government with guidance about international best
practices in data governance. Leverage AI community
networks(Pillar 5)to disseminate guidance.
● Build upon work by UN Global Pulse with DPC to pave
the way towards AI Ethical Guidelines in Ghana. Review
and disseminate international guidelines such as OECD
AI Principles and OECD.AI’s Tools for Implementing
Trustworthy AI or UNESCO Recommendation on the

Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Share free
self-assessment tools for AI developers like the EU AI
Trust Label, Denmark’s D-SEAL, Singapore’s
Implementation and Self-Assessment Guide for
Organisations (ISAGO)
Ghana Participation in 15. Apply to international and regional AI governance Responsible AI Office 2024
contributing to leading platforms
and learning platforms
from leading shaping the E.g. OECD Working Party on Artificial Intelligence Governance
international AI responsible (AIGO), Global Partnership on AI (GPAI), UNESCO, ITU, Smart
policies & adoption of AI Africa, and African Union. Ghana would participate and
practices regionally and perspective and learn from emergingbestpracticesandnational
globally AI strategies for responsible AI.
Greater The rollout of Open 16. Rollout of the Ghana Open Data Initiative (GODI), the MoCD, NITA, Cyber Security 2024
availability and Data initiatives, Ghana Data Exchange Huband data repositories Authority
accessibility of exchanges and
AI-ready data APIs, ● Prioritise programs to share updated government data
from the public Community-cent with the public or AI developers via APIs (data.gov.gh).
and private ric data Provide data collectorswithguidelinesandprinciplesfor
sectors fueling exchanges and collecting, storing and sharing data in both public and
Ghana’s AI repositories private sectors to be machine-readable and AI-ready.
ecosystem Ensure the data is cross-sectoral and not siloed.
● Review case for datamarketplacesinCommunity-centric
dataexchangesforAfricanNationsandtheContinent:
Roadmap for Ghana(2022) by UN Global Pulse.
● Work with international partners (e.g. Smart Africa, GIZ
FAIR Forward, Mozilla), universities (e.g. KNUST
Responsible AI Laboratory), and existing data labelling
and collection initiatives such as Wiki in AfricaorGhana
NLP to promote local and Africa-relevant data
repositories.
● Digital data programsshouldbeimplementedinconcert
with cybersecurity precautions and infrastructure for
APIs.
● Develop and implement incentive models that will
stimulate data sharing from key institutions, agencies
and demographics.

Pillar 5. Coordinate a robust AI community ecosystem
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
Acollaborativeand Mapping & 17. Build & convene an online and in-person AI community Responsible AI 2023
coordinated AI convening Office
community that Ghana’s AI ● Task the Responsible AI office to build a live online repository of
accelerates the community personnel, programmes and resourcesofexistingAIcommunities MESTI
growth of AI in in Ghana, such as the Artificial Intelligence Association of Ghana,
Ghana Ghana NLP, Google Developers, Python Ladies in Accra, Deep
Learning Indaba, Ghana Tech Lab, including its Africa AI
Accelerator Program, Hacklab Foundation, Tony Blair Institute’s
Ghana AI Policy Network, and stakeholders participating in the
National AI Strategy consultation process. Ensure inclusion of
communities dedicated to women and other underrepresented
groups.
● Leverage these communities to expand the list to include
start-ups, university research centres and programs (e.g.KNUST’s
partnership with Google on AI in agriculture), and students and
professionals involved in AI. In addition, engage the Ghanaian
professional diaspora working in international technology
companies.
● Using this list, convene an online community and an initial
in-person meet-up, followed by a sequence of continuous
engagements. The meet-ups can revolve around theoccasionofa
conference, project presentations, or a hackathon for a challenge
in Ghana presented by the publicsectorthatcanpavethewayfor
a PPP project. For example, launch a series of quarterly AI
meet-ups for AI practitioners to present their activities or tackle
shared problems based on theCity.AImodel.
● Coordinate with MESTI for their envisioned knowledge-sharing
platformtoprovideAIinnovatorswithacollaborativeenvironment
and support tools.
AI Hub in Ghana 18. Expand and establish complementary physical or virtual AI Responsible AI 2024
innovation hubs across the country, especially in marginalised Office
communities, to promote collaborations and knowledge sharing
● Consider model examples such as Tunisia’s AI Hub at The Dot.
Begin from existing hubs, such as (but not limited to) iSpace,
Impact Hub, Kumasi Hive, hapaSpace in Kumasi, the HOPin

Academy, iCode in Takoradi and Ho Node in the Volta Region,
corporate office such as Google, or a virtual platform withevents
revolving around various hubs.
● Expand the capacity and presence of Accra Digital Centre across
the various regions in Ghana, situating them to leverage the
communities' unique strengths and opportunities.
● Liaise with District Assemblies to integrate AI Hubs with already
established Community ICT Centres.
● Run community skills development and capacity building
programmes in rural and community schools to drive awareness
and deepen their digital-assertiveness.

Pillar 6. Accelerate AI adoption across sectors
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
Private sector AI 5 Key AI Pilot 19. Spark investment into AI adoption with 5 AI pilot Responsible AI Office, 2024
adoption Projects to projects from across key sectors MoCD, MESTI, sectoral
resulting in Showcase ministries, Bank of
inclusion, ● Catalyse investment into AI adoption by supporting the Ghana, international
productivity and launch and showcasing the success of 5 AI pilot projects development
efficiency gains from key sectors: healthcare, transportation, agriculture, organisations,
across sectors financial services, public administration and environment multinational technology
(See Appendix 1 - Booklet of AI Use Cases). Facilitate PPPs companies
or collaborate with public and private sector entities and
universities on projects to ensure synergies in R&D,
funding, data, logistics, and scalability.
● Coordinate with MESTI’s Ghana Innovation and Research
Commercialization Center (GIRC), CSIR-INST, and Strategic
Technology Centers
● Involve a selection outside of Accra for the inclusion of
diverse communities.
● In reference to Singapore’s AI Strategy (2022), consider
international collaborations withmultinationalresearchers,
businesses or governments to promote investment and
knowledge sharing.
Copyright, IP and 20. Review and clarify laws for copyright, patents and Various stakeholders in 2023
patent law intellectual property the IP community,IPand
Patents Unit at Registrar
Encourage investment into research and development at start-ups General’s Department at
and companies bysupportingintellectualproperty.Engageabroad Ministry of Justice &
IP community in Ghana, including the registrar of companies, to Attorney General’s
protect the property rights of innovators. Department
Incentives to 21.ImplementincentivesforAIstart-ups,e.g.taxbreaksfor MoCD,MESTI,MoF,MoH, 2023
support AI research & development or employment Accra Digital Centre
start-ups and
R&D Refer to any existing policies (e.g. Ghana Digital Economy Policy,
Ghana Integrated DigitalTransformationBlueprint,DigitalFinancial
Services Policy, Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and
Innovation (MESTI) Innovation Policy, Health Sector ICT Policy and
Strategy 2005, Ghana Health Service Patients’ Charter 2002.

Pillar 7. Invest in Applied AI Research
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
Continuous A climate-smart 22. Establish a Special Research Initiative to delve into MESTI CSIR-Institute for Scientific 2025
improvement Agriculture and Forestry climate-smart agriculture and forestry and Technological Information
of AI Research Initiative (CSIR-INSTI), universities
implementati To develop viable responsive solutions, the Initiative’s goals
ons and include:
value ● Improve productivity and commercial returns of
creationfrom farmers
new AI ● Ensure Ghana contributes to the preservation of the
opportunities environment and global sustainability goals in a
context-responsive and measurable manner
● Create strategies to sensitise key players who would
benefit from research initiatives focusing on this
domain
● Fostering of Partnerships among R&D departments of
institutions and startups to generate new ideas and
develop new solutions, as well as work together to
bring funding to solve challenges
A Natural Language 23. Establish a Natural Language Processing (NLP) Institute of Languages (GIL), 2025
Processing Centre of Centre of Excellence (CoE) AITI-KACE, MESTI, MoCD, Ghana
Excellence
The CoE’s goals include:
● Expand Ghanaian language dictionary e.g. yearly
addition of new words to the existing lexicon
● Bridge gaps in communication for the general public
including traders
● Develop translating chips using AI to easily translate
English text and other usedforeignlanguagetextand
audio into Ghanaian languages
● Build legal tech that explores NLPtoofferlegaladvice
in Ghanaian languages
○ AITI-KACE is working on AI Projects in this
regard at their Sunyani Campus
● Coordinate with existing NLP expertise in Ghana,
including Ghana NLP and university (E.g. KNUST) and
industry actors (e.g. Google)

A National Deep Science 24. Develop a framework for the establishment of a MESTI, MoCD, Ghana Tertiary 2025
Institute National Deep Science Institute Education Council, Academia,
e.g. KNUST Responsible AI
The Institute would pursue research in deep tech, cognitive Laboratory (RAIL)
tech, and leverage ML & AI to tackle critical societal issues as
well as uncover breakthroughs for critical sectors of Ghana’s
economy: The focus should be on:
● Using AI to tackle and churn context-relevant
inventions, new tools, learned models and insights to
boost Ghana’s sectors (e.g. health) and industry.
● Develop a strong data core for ML that other sectors,
businesses and stakeholders can leverage.
● Develop capabilities in general purpose AI in a broad
range of cognitive domains, such as learning,
language, perception, reasoning, creativity, and
planning.
● Develop capabilities in context-relevant human-AI
collaboration to augment collaboration and shared
abilities between humans and AI to boost outcomes
and productivity of human labour.

Pillar 8: Promote AI Adoption in Public Sector
Outcome Recommendation Activity Actor(s) Year
Leverage the Public procurement 25. Develop a program that increases access for digital & AI-focused MOCD, Accra 2023
public sectoras processes start-ups to public procurement processes Digital Centre,
a key demand redesigned to Public
driver for AI include AI ● Leverage the public sector to support demand and opportunities for Procurement
companies and start-ups innovativestart-ups.Startup-friendlytenders/bidstobemadeavailable Authority,
start-ups. to support innovators in AI adoption. Ministry of
● Facilitate partnerships between start-ups and larger companies to Business
collaborate in public procurement bids; Development
Establish a framework for bidding consortia to involve start-ups.
Alternatively, develop a programme or regulatorysandboxtoeasethe
minimum requirements for start-ups to apply to projects and enable
trial and error.
Refer to Tony Blair Institute for Global Change’s ‘AI Procurement’
recommendations in its AI Toolkit.
26. Evolve public sector mindset to view algorithms as IP and work
with vendors & start-ups to co-create IP in AI
● Review contractingframeworksandestablishanewcontractualregime
that motivates public sector investment in algorithms to co-create IPs.
AI Civil servant AI 27. Establish a program to train civil&publicservantstodesign,lead NITA, AITI-KACE, 2024
transformation capacity and implement AI projects in public services Ghana Civil
projects in the building Service, Public
public sector program and Build on examples such as SmartAfricaDigitalAcademy(SADA)’sfree13-hour Services
digital culture online course ‘Artificial Intelligence for Policymakers’, UNESCO’s ‘Digital Commission,
mainstreaming Transformation & AI Competency Framework for Civil Servants,’theTonyBlair National Labour
Institute’s ‘Harnessing Responsible AI Toolkit,’ or GIZ and Human Sciences Commission
Research Council’s ‘Handbook for Implementing a Capacity Building
Programme for Policy Makers on AI.’
28. Incentivise an AIculturebycreatingarewardsystemtoencourage
service delivery excellence utilising AI
Individuals can be rewarded (compensation, promotion, awards, recognition)
for their role in utilising AI and ML to enhance public sector services delivery
while exemplifying a positive AI and innovation culture.

Use of AI to guide 29. Develop a comprehensive public administration data Public Services 2025
Policy Planning, dashboard/interface to provide data analytics for policy planning, Department,
Programmes, programme mix, resource allocation, monitoring and evaluation Office of the
Adoption and KPI President, NITA,
Monitoring and Design anddeployacross-agencyPolicyDataReferenceBureau(PDRB)fordata Private Sector
Evaluation in the gathering, sharing, analytics & visualisations for smart decision making.
Public Sector
Transform public 30. Initiate a programme to identify key public service AI use-cases Ministry of Local 2023
sector operational Government and
workflows and ● Review opportunities in Appendix 1 - Booklet of AI Use Cases. Rural
integrate AI in ● For example, virtualagentsforcitizenservicessuchasfilingfortaxes, Development,
corepublicservice requesting and renewing driver's licences and identification. AI to Public Works
functions transform public infrastructure maintenance by using unstructured Department, NITA
video data from public transport vehicles such as buses to detect
potholes and generate a schedule and tracking model for repairs.
31. Develop a workflow and operational framework for public sector
work for agility & data-driven decision making
● Set up a public sector workflow transformation committee to review
existing workflow and develop an operational architecture that aligns
with theEnterpriseArchitectureledbyNITAand integratesseamlessly
with the Common National Digital Architecture.
● Encourage positions for data scientists in key sectors to support
data-driven decision-making in the public sector.

Appendix 1 - Booklet of AI Use Cases
AI in Healthcare in Ghana
AI in Smart Electricity Grid in Ghana
AI in Environment & Circular Economy in Ghana
Air Quality Monitoring
Recycling
Smart water management
AI in Transportation in Ghana
Urban Traffic Management System
Smart Vehicle Fleet Management System
AI in Agriculture in Ghana
Increasing Crop Yields
Soil Management
Farm Management
Detecting Food Fraud
Land & Natural Resources in Ghana
Simulation Modelling of Landscape and Settlement Distribution
Land Use and Development
Wildlife and Forest Conservation
AI in Financial Services in Ghana
Business-to-business (B2B)
Business-to-consumer (B2C)
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C)

AI in Healthcare in Ghana
AI can be widely used in healthcare by addressing challenges and leveraging digital data to
improve and expand access to quality healthcare. Use cases vary across the so-called “4P
Medicine”: Personal, Preventive, Participative and Predictive.13 Personalised and precision
medicine, more accurate and faster diagnostics, and mobile health applications can also
increase millions' access to quality medical care. AI applications in healthcare can overcome
limitations in government resources, augment human expertise and improve doctors'
productivity, health outcomes, and efficiency in services. For example, AI is used in diagnostics
for medical imaging, genomics and predictive medicine, therapy in tools for biotech and robot
surgeons, and managing health systems and long-term care.14 Efficiencies can support cost
reductions and increase inclusion by extending clinician services into remote areas at a lower
cost. In healthcare, lives can be helped and harmed - necessitating careful assessment of AI
system lifecycles and risks.
Across Ghana, there are many opportunities and high interest to utilise AI to improve
healthcare.15 For example, the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS)’ claims management
system can be improved by matching prescriptions with costs of medications and healthcare.
Current examples of AI applications in Ghana include:
● AI to predict prescription refills by mPharma16
● AI for automated diagnostics, forecasts and prognostics by MinoHealth17.
● AI for transporting medical equipment to the rural parts of Ghana using drones by
Zipline18.
● AI in the provision of patients with easy access to their digital health records by Redbird19
● AI for remote patient monitoring to effectively assist the deficit in providing patient ratios,
maternal mortality rates20
● Ghana NLP is leveraging hospital records to predict infant mortality for malaria to
support triaging emergency cases.
● KNUST Responsible Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (RAIL) is working with partners to
develop language translation tools for doctors in remote areas in Ghana.
The global artificial intelligence in the healthcare market is estimated to generate USD 6.9 billion
13Lannquist, Y, (2021), “AI in healthcare in Africa,” The Future Society,
https://thefuturesociety.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/AI-in-Healthcare-in-Africa-TFS-for-Mo-Ibrahim-Fo
undation-Forum-Report_vf.pdf.
14Ezratty, O. (2018),Les usages de l’intelligenceartificielle,Edition 2018, Online,
https://www.oezratty.net/wordpress/2018/usages-intelligence-artificielle-2018/.
15Expert interviews;https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/ghana-healthcare;
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf
16https://mpharma.com/
17https://www.minohealth.org/
18https://www.flyzipline.com/
19https://redbird.co/
20https://swisscognitive.ch/2022/03/29/perceptions-ghanaian-healthcare-workers-have-about-ai/

in 2021 and reach USD 67.4 billion by 2027.21
Key actors in Ghana include: the Ministry of Health, Ghana Health Service, pharmacies,
hospitals, startups, e.g. mPharma, MinoHealth AI Labs, Zipline, Redbird and academic and
corporate applied AI research labs.
AI in Smart Electricity Grid in Ghana
AI can optimise power delivery in the electrical grid22. Examples include:
● Prediction of faults in the grid to prevent the occurrence of the fault and save electrical
equipment
● Optimization of power routes to reduce power line losses and save money on electricity
generation.
● Maintenance scheduling optimization across all phases of electricity delivery, including
generation, transmission, and distribution.
● Prediction of demand in the grid to avoid outages when demand exceeds supply and
lower costs in electricity production since more efficient and cost-effective sources of
electricity can be sourced and emergency generation would be reduced.
Besides improving the electricity system, the market opportunity is $817 million per year (based
on calculated loss in revenue in power outages from 2015 estimated at $55.8 million per month
and adjusted for inflation). Key players include the Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG), the
Ghana Grid Company (GridCo), the Volta River Authority (VRA), and artificial intelligence
startups.
AI in Environment & Circular Economy in Ghana
Smart Africa’s Blueprint: Artificial Intelligence for Africa report presents various examples of AI
applications for climate action.23 Similarly, the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI) has identified
numerous applications of AI to help combat climate change and support the environment.24
Illustrated examples for Ghana include AI applied to monitor air quality, support renewable
energy, manage recycling and water. Key actors in Ghana include the Ministry of Environment,
21Artificial intelligence in healthcare, 2021, Markets and Markets,
https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/artificial-intelligence-healthcare-market-54679303.ht
ml
22Jian Jiao 2020 Iop Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 510 022012,
Https://Iopscience.Iop.Org/Article/10.1088/1755-1315/510/2/022012/Pdf;SAP Insights, “The smart grid:
How AI is powering today’s energy technologies,
https://www.sap.com/insights/smart-grid-ai-in-energy-technologies.html.
23 Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.
24Global Partnership on AI, Climate Change and AI,
https://www.gpai.ai/projects/climate-change-and-ai.pdf

Science, Technology & Innovation (MESTI), the Ministry of Energy, Ghana Water Company
Limited (GWCL), and AI startups.
Air Quality Monitoring
Air quality monitoring stations and devices installed with AI capabilities could help renewable
energy companies monitor how their operations are affecting the environment and how they can
take action.
Recycling
An aerial view of Ghana’s beaches, markets, lorry parks and stations reveals the amount of
plastic waste generated and poor reuse and recycle culture. An exploration of robotics devices
that can sort waste into plastics or recyclable material and biodegradable could help gather all
recyclable waste to be prepared for recycling. Drone technology could be used to survey areas
that have a high concentration of human activities during the day, e.g. markets, lorry stations,
etc., to monitor the rate at which plastic waste is generated, where to provide waste separation
containers, and to provide recycling companies with the data collected for action to be taken.
For example, Environment360 is a Ghanaian plastic waste management company that could
take advantage of AI solutions to obtain insights on points where plastic waste is heavily
generated. There is also the opportunity to gather data on the rate of plastic waste accumulation
that could be informative to the government to aid with programmes to reduce waste in the
country.
Smart water management
AI can be a great tool for better management of water distribution in Ghana. Currently, much of
the water that leaves treatment plants runs on the ground due to burst pipes, leakages and
other reasons. AI can be leveraged with the Internet of Things (IoT) hardware to detect
leakages and automate the closing of various sections of the distribution system to reduce the
loss of treated water. If AI is used in conjunction with supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA), this will lead to real-time analysis of the water distribution network in Ghana for
leakages and other important information like water pressure. AI can also be used to predict
bursts and leakages through the analysis of various data, such as the age of pipes and storage
units, water pressure, and frequency of maintenance. Lastly, AI can also be leveraged to
analyse usage statistics of various neighbourhoods to predict and better schedule maintenance
of various system sections.25
The global Smart Water Management market is expected to grow from USD 13.8 billion in 2021
to USD 22.4 billion by 2026, at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 10.1% during the
25Jenny, H., Wang, Y., Alonso E.G., Minguez R. 2020. Using artificial intelligence for smart water
management systems, ADB Briefs. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/BRF200191-2

forecast period.26
AI in Transportation in Ghana
The transport market is vast with road, air, rail, river and sea transport. AI applications in the
realm of transportation are varied. Some applications rely on optimisation theory, for example,
for route planning. Transport apps can make it easier for commuters to plan their journeys. AI
applications are also used for yield and pricing management by, for example, airlines27. Other
applications rely on computer vision, for example, for autonomous driving. Autonomous vehicles
(AVs) are cars that “sense” their environment and move within it with little or no human input28.
The operating environment of AVs is highly dynamic and uncertain, immediate response times
are necessary, and accuracy must be extremely high to prevent accidents. Key actors in Ghana
include the Ministry of Transport, Ghana Roads and Highways Authority, Motor Traffic and
Transport Directorate of the Ghana Police Service, AI startups (e.g. Ayalolo), Mapping NGOs
such as OpenStreetMap Ghana that provide maps data to global maps providers such as
Google/Apple Maps.29
The next steps include:
1. Research
The use cases outlined encompass various requirements and require participation and
support from various government and private actors. Feasibility studies can assess the
revenue potential of the use cases and the impact on the urban population versus the
rural population.
2. Infrastructure investment
Most of the investment required to actualize these use cases is in software engineering.
For example, the transponders mentioned in the examples could be an app on a
smartphone with a high-fidelity data connection.
Urban Traffic Management System
There are applications for AI in monitoring, maintaining and optimising the flow of traffic for
smart urban cities. In urban traffic management systems, AI can predict and optimise traffic
26Smart water management market, 2021, markets and markets,
https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/smart-water-management-market-1265.html;
Meenu EG, 2021, The promise of artificial intelligence in water management, Analytics Insight
https://www.analyticsinsight.net/the-promise-of-artificial-intelligence-in-water-management/.
27Ezratty, O. (2018),Les usages de l’intelligenceartificielle,Edition 2018, Online,
https://www.oezratty.net/wordpress/2018/usages-intelligence-artificielle-2018/.
28 Taeihagh, A., Hazel Si Min, L. (2019), Governingautonomous vehicles: emerging responses for safety,
liability, privacy, cybersecurity, and industry risks,Transport Reviews,39(1): 103–128.arXiv:1807.05720.
doi:10.1080/01441647.2018.1494640.ISSN0144-1647.
29“Home | OpenStreetMap Ghana.” OpenStreetMap Ghana, https://osmghana.org/. Accessed 3 Sept.
2022.

flows to reduce traffic and, consequently, reduce travel time, pollution from idle cars, and
congestion. AI can be used to predict the optimal phasing arrangements and the optimal
duration for each phase at traffic intersections. Computer vision systems in traffic cameras can
monitor traffic flow and detect rules violation. AI can also be used for traffic coordination in
emergency cases like ambulances and motorcades or for road toll monitoring and collection.30
Smart Vehicle Fleet Management System
Vehicle fleet management refers to the set of activities to maximise the lifetime value of a fleet
of automobiles. Corporations with large fleets of automobiles, such as trucking and airline
companies, employ such techniques extensively to maximise profits by maximising asset
utilisation while simultaneously minimising costs. An often overlooked factor in vehicle fleet
management is that companies track their fleet in real-time. This generates a vast amount of
real-time probe data ripe for exploitation for various other optimization objectives using AI.
For example, consider a scenario where all public buses in Accra are fitted with a smart
transponder that transmits the vehicle's location every 2 seconds. Once the probe data is
collected in a central location and transformed into a standard format such as Apache Parquet31,
AI can be used to enable a whole range of interesting use cases.
Route planning is a classical optimization problem that can be solved using numerous direct
analytical techniques32. AI models are very useful in such scenarios involving massive datasets.
Techniques such as deep reinforcement learning (RL)33 can be employed to train a model to
learn patterns from historical data to predict - i.e. infer - future movements in real-time. In
addition, AI can help predict the estimated time of arrival (ETA) to unlock the basics of a
mapping platform specific to Ghana and the travel preferences of its population. RL refers to the
branch of AI machine learning where the model training is neither supervised nor
unsupervised34. Rather, the AI model generates different what-if scenarios and measures the
performance of its predictions based on historical data. The training phase is very time- and
compute-intensive, so it must be performed offline. However, once a model is trained on
sufficient training data - for example, probe data over a single year would be sufficient for
accurate predictions in this use case - it can plan routes in real-time.
30O.I. Olayode, L.K. Tartibu, M.O. Okwu, Application of Artificial Intelligence in Traffic Control System of
Non-autonomous Vehicles at Signalized Road Intersection.,Procedia CIRP, Volume 91, 2020, Pages
194-200, ISSN 2212-8271,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.02.167;Mazur, S., 2020, Smart traffic
management: optimizing your city’s infrastructure spend,
https://www.digi.com/blog/post/smart-traffic-management-optimizing-spend.
31“Apache Parquet.” Apache Parquet, https://parquet.apache.org/. Accessed 3 Sept. 2022.
32M. A. P. Muniandy, L. K. Mee and L. K. Ooi, "Efficient route planning for travelling salesman problem,"
2014 IEEE Conference on Open Systems (ICOS), 2014, pp. 24-29, doi: 10.1109/ICOS.2014.7042404.
33Bello, Irwan, et al. "Neural combinatorial optimization with reinforcement learning." arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09940 (2016).
34Osiński, Błażej. “What Is Reinforcement Learning? The Complete Guide - Deepsense.Ai.”
Deepsense.Ai, Błażej Osiński, 5 July 2018,
https://deepsense.ai/what-is-reinforcement-learning-the-complete-guide/.

AI can be applied in monitoring, maintaining and managing fleets of public transport buses in
the cities and around the country. The Government of Ghana currently has transportation
services - Ayalolo and metro mass transit. With the proliferation of mobile and smartphones
among most Ghanaians, AI mobile apps for fleet management could be used to schedule bus
times for various pick-up locations. During peak and low times, this same app can meet the
changing demands of buses at a particular station or pick-up point. It can provide information on
the location of all public buses and the state of these buses in terms of maintenance and also
track the performance of drivers and vehicles. The AI fleet app should be able to provide
information on trips to log issues and other information for reporting on the performance of the
public transportation services. The AI-enabled app solution could be extended to the private
sector to taxi cab and “trotro” bus owners who may want to streamline their transportation
services.
Consider a scenario where all public buses in Accra are fitted with smart transponders that
transmit not only the vehicle's location every 2 seconds but also the total occupancy of the
vehicle at that point in time. RL can be employed not just for route planning and ETA prediction
but also for capacity estimation. This would allow local developers in Ghana to develop travel
applications where users can book an end-to-end trip comprising different modes of
transportation such as bicycles, buses, and taxis. Although existing ridesharing services - such
as Uber, Bolt, Swift-Wheels, and others35 - already operate in this space, their services are
limited to drivers signing up to relay passengers using their private vehicles. Providing visibility
into the capacity and route planning for public transportation services would allow such apps to
offer riders options involving public transportation. This could also start a virtuous cycle of
charging these apps for their API calls and reinvesting those profits into making public transport
safer and more reliable for the consumer.
AI in Agriculture in Ghana
According to NASA climate simulations, crop yields in Ghana are predicted to decrease due to
climate change over the next decades.36 Meanwhile, Ghana’s yield for various crops has
chronically fallen below its potential 15 16 37. In addition to making up a large portion of the
35Ofori, Bright. “Ride Hailing Apps In Ghana 2022.” ICT Catalogue, https://facebook.com/ictcat, 16 July
2022, https://ictcatalogue.com/ride-hailing-apps-in-ghana/.
36Jägermeyr, J., Müller, C., Ruane, A.C.et al.Climateimpacts on global agriculture emerge earlier in new
generation of climate and crop models.Nat Food2,873–885 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021-00400-y;
NASA, 2021, “Global Climate Change Impact on Crops Expected Within 10 Years, NASA Study Finds,”
https://www.nasa.gov/feature/esnt/2021/global-climate-change-impact-on-crops-expected-within-10-years
-nasa-study-finds
37Ghana - Global yield gap atlas. (n.d.). Global YieldGap Atlas. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://www.yieldgap.org/Ghana

country’s GDP38, agriculture is responsible for earning approximately 10% of Ghana’s export
receipts15 39.
The market opportunity for AI in agriculture is tremendous. For example, Ghana earned 3 billion
USD yearly from its agricultural exports from 2008 to 202040. Moreover, a conservative estimate
of 10% for the improvement in crop yields due to AI delivers at an additional 300m USD per
year. As a result, the global AI in Agriculture Market is expected to reach USD 3,984.5 Million by
2026 and to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 25.2% from 2019 to 2026.
There are many applications for AI in agriculture.41 According to Smart Africa’s Blueprint:
Artificial Intelligence for Africa report, AI can play a role in the whole value chain, from financing
creditworthy smallholder farmers to supporting production by analysing and predicting diseases
and pests and promoting greater price control. The report points out that the lack of data could
be addressed using nontraditional data like satellite imagery or phone data to analyse crops or
weather data.42 AI can also be used to improve supply chain logistics (including in fertilisers)
and inventory and to prevent food waste. AI can also support detecting food fraud, such as the
mixing of dyes with palm oil or inauthentic honey.
Key actors in Ghana include the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Ministry of Environment,
Science Technology and Innovation (MESTI), Universities and research institutions such as
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) and the School of Agriculture
at the University of Ghana, AI startups like Karagro AI and Farmerline, the Planting for Food and
Jobs Initiative (PFAJ), Agricultural Development Bank (ADB).
The next steps include:
1. Research and domain studies
a. Projects in this space will require coordination with a large number of
stakeholders. Therefore, it is imperative to obtain empirical data about the
feasibility of these projects to help guide discussions and decisions around
prioritisation and funding. (Refer to Ghana’s National AI Strategy Pillar 7: Invest
in Applied AI Research).
2. Hardware investment
a. Investments in network hardware will account for the largest proportion of
investments in this space. This includes but is not limited to drones to obtain
images and video of crop plantations, a variety of sensors to gather soil quality
38Anzola, F. (n.d.).Ghana (GHA) Exports, Imports,and Trade Partners | OEC. OEC - The Observatory of
Economic Complexity. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from https://oec.world/en/profile/country/gha
39Ghana. (n.d.). United States Trade Representative. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/africa/west-africa/ghana
40Statista. (2022, March 14).Export of agriculturalproducts in Ghana 2008–2020. Retrieved August 28,
2022, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/1111140/export-of-agricultural-products-from-ghana/
41Faggella, D., 2020, AI in Agriculture - present applications and impact,
https://emerj.com/ai-sector-overviews/ai-agriculture-present-applications-impact/;
42 Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.

information, and internet infrastructure providing connectivity for periodic data
uploads.
3. Capacity building
a. Using AI will affect the existing processes and procedures. For example, once
the AI model generates a signal, the farm employees will need to act on it.
Training is crucial to ensuring that the feedback loop created by employing AI on
existing farms is successful. Support from the local farming communities is also
essential in this regard. The feedback loop must be accessible and user-friendly;
otherwise local stakeholders will not buy into the idea, and adoption will lag.
Increasing Crop Yields
Crop yields are heavily dependent on a variety of factors, such as the amount of water, fertiliser,
temperature, and pesticide. AI models can process signals from all of these variables in
real-time to predict crop yields 43. Furthermore, AI models can trigger alerts when readings are
predicted to fall below or above pre-configured thresholds that signify the optimal amount for
any given feature.
Computer vision techniques such as panoptic segmentation can be used to classify images of
crops into healthy and unhealthy categories based on the details extracted from them. Panoptic
segmentation is an ensemble machine learning method that employs semantic and instance
segmentation on signals such as colour and shape to classify images. This can be an effective
method to monitor the rate of growth and health of crops in different areas of a plantation.
Furthermore, combined with other sensor data, image segmentation can be useful for yield
mapping, which refers to a suite of techniques for predicting soil yield. Startups in Ghana like
karaagro.com and farmerline co already provide relevant services in this sector.
Since AI heavily depends on data for its predictive models, data collection is crucial for
increasing crop yields. In agriculture, drones can gather visual data - both video and static
images - on crop plantations. Additionally, sensors can gather fine-grained soil measurements to
ensure that crops receive the right amount of nutrients and water. Other sensors could collect
data on the temperature to which crops are exposed. The AI techniques employed will differ
according to the data the model uses for training.
Soil Management
The health of the soil used in farming is a major factor that impacts crop yield. AI can be used to
monitor the health of the soil to make better decisions on soil nutrients, fertilisers, and the type
of crops suitable for the type of soil condition. Data collected by soil health detective drones
43Cavallito, M. (2022, February 23).Artificial intelligencecan reduce fertilizer use, UK researchers say.
Re Soil Foundation. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://resoilfoundation.org/en/innovation-technology/artificial-intelligence-fertilizer/

could be analysed to inform how the health of the soil should be improved, nutrient deficiencies,
the variety of crops that do well in the type of soil, and to plan for larger or leaner harvests. The
health of the soil could also inform how farmers can plan for crops to meet the market's
demands. Weather conditions data collected from a soil monitoring device can provide
information on crops that will thrive during the year.
For example, a German-based tech start-up, PEAT, has developed an AI-based application
called Plantix that identifies the nutrient deficiencies in soil, including plant pests and diseases.
With this information, farmers can know which fertiliser could help improve harvest quality.
Likewise, trace Genomics is an American AI-based company that provides analysis to monitor
the health of crops and soil for farmers.
Farm Management
AI can improve the efficiency of farms where cash crops like cocoa, millet and others are grown
in Ghana. AI can be used in the automation and optimization of the irrigation of large farms.
Using drones equipped with computer vision can monitor fields and detect diseases on the
leaves of the plants - enabling precision agriculture and targeted pesticides. This analysis can
inform how many plants are diseased and how long they have been infected and allow for quick
interventions to limit the spread of diseases and prevent the loss of whole fields.44 The Kenyan
smartphone application Eska allows farmers to return an automated AI-enabled analysis of
potential diseases of plants through their phone cameras.
Detecting Food Fraud in Agriculture Supply Chain to Enhance Food Safety
Food fraud occurs when consumers are deceived about the quality and/or composition of the
food they are purchasing. It is typically motivated by vendors’ desire to gain an unfair advantage
in markets. Mislabeling, adulteration, and ingredient substitution are pervasive forms of food
fraud that affect people worldwide. AI can be used to verify the authenticity of food products and
food additives in accordance with Codex Alimentarius standards. The Codex Alimentarius, also
known as the "Food Code", is a collection of international standards, guidelines, and codes of
conduct designed to protect consumer health and ensure fair trade practises in the food
industry. The WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS)
Measures acknowledges Codex food safety standards as the international benchmark. When
food producers and traders adhere to Codex standards, consumers can have confidence in the
safety and quality of the products they purchase, and importers are assured that the products
meet the specifications.
44Selvaraj, M.G., Vergara, A., Ruiz, H. et al.2019.AI-powered banana diseases and pest detection.Plant
Methods15, 92.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-019-0475-z;Mohanty Sharada P., Hughes David P.,
Salathé Marcel. 2016. Using Deep Learning for Image-Based Plant Disease Detection, Frontiers in Plant
Science, vol 7,https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2016.01419.

AI can be utilised to mainstream food safety standards and reduce the public health risks
associated with food fraud. Specifically, AI can also detect errors and fraud in the last few steps
of any food distribution chain, from factory to retailer. All parties can access real-time data on
consumer feedback, buying trends, weather, factory or farm locations, harvest progress, and
other metrics by farmers and suppliers. Using machine learning, anti-counterfeit tools can be
used to detect fake products from genuine ones, such as the mixing of dyes with palm oil or
inauthentic honey.
AI in Land & Natural Resources in Ghana
Predictive technologies enabled by AI can be beneficial to support land use and development,
natural resources and conservation in Ghana. However, given the importance of this sector for
the country and economy, it is important to mobilise partnerships among institutions and
technology providers to improve outcomes.
Key actors in Ghana include the Land Use and Spatial Planning Authority (LUSPA), Ministry of
Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR), Minerals Commission, Forestry Commission, Lands
Commission, Centre for Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Services (CERGIS),
mining companies, real estate development companies, AI startups, university research centres,
Ghana Wildlife Society.
Simulation Modelling of Landscape and Settlement Distribution
AI can be used in modelling and predicting the changes in the landscape and settlements based
on the unearthing of certain natural resource deposits in the country. Ghana still has many
untapped natural resources that could aid the nation's development, most of which can be found
in already inhabited areas. When a natural resource (e.g. gold deposit) is discovered, AI can be
used in simulating and modelling the impacts of extraction on the landscape and settlements.
Based on data from previous settlements in the region, AI can assist in planning settlements
around natural resources and in predicting how already existing settlements would be affected
by resource discovery. This should help the government agencies be more proactive in quickly
addressing settlement concerns and utilising natural resource discoveries.45 For example, The
Predictive Analytics Lab at the University of Sussex has a working Simulation Modeling Tool that
uses aerial photography data to classify land use.
Land Use and Development
AI can be used in planning land use and development. Due to climate change and changes in
human needs, the environment is uncertain and changing dynamically - necessitating proper
planning for current and future generations. In addition, coastal areas, including the capital city,
will require urban planning, given the loss of land to the sea and sea water levels rising. AI is a
45Zheng, Minrui, Wenwu Tang, Akinwumi Ogundiran, and Jianxin Yang. 2020. "Spatial Simulation Modeling of
Settlement Distribution Driven by Random Forest: Consideration of Landscape Visibility"Sustainability12, no. 11:
4748.https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114748

powerful tool that can assist planners and developers in governing land use and infrastructure
developments. AI can assist urban and rural planners in studying various scenarios and
evaluating development options. It can also be used to monitor trends and detect anomalies.
For example, the Urban Redevelopment Authority in Singapore deploys AI in urban and
infrastructure decisions. Meanwhile, the Lands Department of Hong Kong is undertaking a
project that leverages AI to plan urban development projects. Real-time, accurate land use
maps produced from satellite images provide a more efficient way to understand the situation
on-ground, compared to traditional physical site visits and laborious measurement approaches.
Wildlife and Forest Conservation
For the conservation of wildlife in our ecosystem, smart devices and cameras for detecting
animal activities could be positioned strategically by the Wildlife Society of Ghana to monitor the
populations and protect them from poachers, hunters and other harmful situations. For example,
Panthera is an international NGO leveraging analysis of video and photos to track populations
and catch poachers. Furthermore, drones can fly over wildlife reserves sending real-time
images of species populations and activities to update the country's databases. Drones could
also send information on injured, sick or any wildlife that could be in danger that needs
assistance.
Using smart devices at strategic points in our forest reserves could help curb unlawful
deforestation.46 Satellite and aerial imagery could also be captured for updating the national
forest reserve database periodically - helping to track which trees are in danger of extinction or
unlawful felling. Furthermore, drones could be deployed over areas prone to bushfires during
the dry seasons to monitor human activities that could spark flames. In the same way, drones
could be deployed over land to send back real-time data on the extent of damage caused by
fires and the locations. This data will provide information on the next line of action to take and
equip authorities to be proactive in future occurrences.47
AI in Financial Services in Ghana
Several types of AI-enabled systems create value for financial services organisations. These
may include customer service chatbots, algorithmic financial planning, recommender systems
for personalised financial products, automated check verification, assessments for loan
applications or insurance claims, or search and discovery for mortgage processes.48 Fraud
detection is also a classic application of machine learning, which uses past data about payers
46Abdenur, A., 2020, How can AI help curb deforestation in the Amazon?, IPI Global Observatory,
https://theglobalobservatory.org/2020/11/how-can-artificial-intelligence-help-curb-deforestation-amazon/.
47World Economic Forum, 2022, How AI can help the world fight wildfires,
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/how-ai-can-help-the-world-fight-wildfires/.
48Ezratty, O. (2018),Les usages de l’intelligenceartificielle, Edition 2018, Online,
https://www.oezratty.net/wordpress/2018/usages-intelligence-artificielle-2018/.

and transactions to suspicious flag operations49.
Key actors in Ghana include the Bank of Ghana, Ministry of Trade and Industry, National
Information Technology Agency (NITA), Telecommunications chamber, private and public banks,
insurance companies and leasing companies, and AI startups such as Nokwary AI and
Mazzuma. In addition, existing pilot projects among AI startups, universities, and public
institutions such as the Bank of Ghana are underway.
The financial services industry of Ghana includes companies engaged in lending activities -
such as traditional banking and leasing - and insurance. AI solutions can be deployed broadly
for direct business operations within each vertical or across regular business operations to help
improve the customer experience, for example. The market opportunity for AI in the financial
services industry falls into 2 main categories: direct business operations and support services.
Overall, all verticals from both categories in the financial sector represent a total global
addressable market of 3.88B USD in 2020, rising to 64.03B by 2030 50. In direct business
operations, AI applications can be subdivided into further categories based on the business
vertical they serve:
Business-to-business (B2B)
A major driver of AI adoption is to reduce risk. Mining massive amounts of data with the help of
AI tools can enhance the Bank of Ghana’s ability to combat money laundering, for example.
Business-to-consumer (B2C)
The major driver of AI adoption is to enhance the consumer experience. For example, AI
adoption can significantly reduce fraudulent credit card transactions, thereby protecting
consumer spending power and enhancing their confidence. Insurance companies, on the other
hand, can benefit by using AI to analyse images of the damage for claims: computer vision
techniques such as instance and semantic segmentation can be used for identifying which parts
of the car were damaged; depth perception can then be employed to assess the extent of the
damage. In addition, automating the assessment of the damage using AI would speed up the
insurance claims process for the customer, resulting in higher customer satisfaction.
There is an exciting opportunity to address the needs of “unbanked” consumers in this vertical
using AI. Credit scores have been a barrier to entry for those who do not transact routinely in
the formal economy. AI can be used to establish “communities” that can vouch for people
applying for micro-loans in the informal economy. This is similar to the model successfully
adopted by Grameen Bank and BRAC to serve people with little or no access to credit via banks
49Ibid.
50Business Wire. (n.d.). Businesswire. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220131005583/en/The-Global-AI-in-Banking-Market-Will-Gr
ow-to-64.03-Billion-by-2030-at-a-CAGR-of-32.6-During-2021-2030---ResearchAndMarkets.com

51 52 53. However, the difference is that AI techniques allow lenders to scale massively with a
fraction of the infrastructure footprint of NGOs like Grameen Bank and BRAC.
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C)
Using AI for calculating credit scores can unlock the peer-to-peer lending market by establishing
a measure of customer trustworthiness. The consumer credit score would include purchase
history, payment history, social standing, et cetera. All of these aspects of consumer spending
behaviour, taken in aggregate generate petabytes of data which can be analysed using AI to
identify trends and assign a score predicated on saving and spending habits.
The second category of services comprises mainly customer service activities like chatbots and
customer helplines. The specific technologies that power these services are voice-to-text
transcription and natural language processing (NLP). Ghana has good potential to develop such
solutions in a local context, especially where language services are required.
Ghana has tremendous potential in all of these sectors. However, public-private partnerships
(PPPs) are crucial for unlocking the latent value in the startup ecosystem. PPPs provide
institutional support, financing of AI ventures, and access to a large customer base in
government services.
In the near term, it is important to adapt procurement guidelines for soliciting tenders for
government-backed projects to make it easier for AI startups to participate. The opportunities
will require major investment in specific AI technologies in the longer term. However, traditional
lenders such as banks in Ghana have very high collateral requirements and short loan maturity
periods, discouraging potential entrepreneurs from pursuing opportunities in these sectors.
Venture capital is the preferred investment vehicle in such scenarios. However, Ghana’s venture
capital industry is currently nascent, with very little legal protection for local or foreign
investments. Access to capital is important for market activities to flourish in any sector,
especially in this case. Therefore, the government must work on policies to make it easier for
low-capital ventures to get funding via venture capital.
51What is Microcredit? – Grameen Bank. (n.d.). Grameen Bank. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://grameenbank.org/what-is-microcredit/
52BRAC: Creating opportunities for people to realizepotential. (n.d.).
Https://Www.Brac.Net/Images/Factsheet/MF_Briefing_Doc_English.Pdf. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://www.brac.net
53Microfinance. (n.d.). BRAC. Retrieved August 28, 2022, from
https://www.brac.net/program/microfinance/

Appendix 2 - AI Ecosystem & Policy Analysis
Ghana's Artificial Intelligence Ecosystem Mapping:
Initiatives, Stakeholders, and Policy Landscape
Developed by The Future Society (TFS) for Ministry of Communications and
Digitalisation, Smart Africa, GIZ FAIR Forward
Last updated: Spring 2022
Photo by Ifeoluwa A. on Unsplash

Around the world, AI is becoming increasingly pervasive in our lives as a "general-purpose
technology." As described in Smart Africa’s "AI for Africa" Blueprint report54, AI brings major
opportunities to Africa to achieve sustainable growth and development. Technological
advancements in AI are being enabled by greater digital connectivity, increasing amounts of
data, advanced algorithms, and gains in computing power. While most AI development and
applications are currently in advanced economies, AI also has great potential to transform
emerging economies.
In Ghana, the responsible adoption of AI has the potential to help the country by driving
inclusive economic advancement. However, although the opportunities of AI are large, they are
inextricably connected with risks, including algorithmic bias, widening inequality gaps, lack of
transparency and explainability of algorithmic outcomes, cybersecurity, privacy and safety
concerns, and gaps in inclusion and data governance. These require developing smart AI
governance, carefully balanced by ethical guidelines for responsible AI adoption.
While AI has tremendous transformative potential that can positively impact all sectors in
Ghana, such as healthcare, agriculture, education and other forms of public and private service
delivery, Ghana has not yet taken full advantage. Beyond Ghana, the African continent as a
whole still lags behind. A measure of Oxford Insights’ governments' readiness for AI adoption
revealed that the African continent scored the lowest on average. Moreover, few countries in the
region have set out their vision for the implementation of AI.55 Generally, African countries lack
the preparedness to harness the tools that widespread adoption of AI would bring to solve many
of the continent's most pressing social and economic challenges.56
Nonetheless, Ghana has numerous advantages and strengths that can be harnessed to enable
a local Ghanaian AI ecosystem. For example, some notable AI activities in Ghana have
stemmed from the setting up of Google's first AI centre in Africa in Accra. For Ghana to take
advantage of its burgeoning AI community, supporting and developing a responsible AI
ecosystem with long-term benefits is critical. Furthermore, it is imperative for Ghana to ensure a
responsible, inclusive and sustainable AI ecosystem. As much as AI wields positive
transformative power, it has the potential to infringe on human rights and likely lead to biased
decision-making as a result of the misuse of data. To this end, approaches and policies across
stakeholders should be coordinated to equip and drive Ghana's AI ecosystem to harness AI
opportunities while mitigating its risks. These activities require engagement with stakeholders
across the public and private sectors, including corporates and startups, civil society, academia,
and a keen understanding of the digital ecosystem and policy dynamics.
54Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf.
55 Oxford Insights and the International Development Research Centre. (2020). Government Artificial 2
Intelligence Readiness Index 2020. https://www.oxfordinsights.com/government-ai-readinessindex-2020
56https://ircai.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/AI4D_Report_Responsible_AI_in_SSA.pdf

Artificial Intelligence In The Broader African Context
Responsible AI adoption offers opportunities across the African continent. Africa stands out as
the continent with the youngest population in the world. According to the African Development
Bank Group’s report titled “Jobs for Youth in Africa: Catalysing Youth Opportunity Across Africa”,
Africa’s youth population is rapidly growing and expected to double to over 830 million by 2050,
positioning the youth as Africa’s greatest asset in AfDB’s estimation. Africa’s young population,
coupled with its urban populations57 , presents challenges to address and opportunities to
ensure the maximisation of the continent’s resources. The age and population dynamics require
a deliberate move by African governments to prioritise and ensure that the continent can fully
leverage the plethora of advantages that digital technology brings.
In ensuring fair and equitable access by its youth and general population, AI can be a launch
pad for Africa to make a paradigm shift to more efficient, optimal and transparent delivery of
public services and infrastructure development. For example, in the healthcare sector, structural
inequalities, shortages of qualified healthcare professionals or supplies, barriers to accessibility,
affordability and rural and urban divides raise critical gaps that AI can help address.58 Investing
in digital technologies, including AI, will prepare Africa to generate new economies and
contribute to and compete in a global economy. Strategic adoption of advanced digital
technologies such as AI can provide employment opportunities for the youth in the AI value
chain and opportunities for the continent’s innovators and entrepreneurs to plug into global
value chains.
To date, most countries in Africa have yet to bring digital technology advancement to the policy
tables. There is renewed impetus by some African countries such as Ghana, Rwanda, Kenya,
Mauritius, South Africa, Tunisia, Morocco and Egypt to set the wheels of change moving.59
Blueprint: AI for Africa (Smart Africa)
Smart Africa’s Blueprint: Artificial Intelligence for Africa report presents key elements and advice
for national AI strategies and international coordination in Africa. The blueprint is based on the
view that “successful global cooperation is best achieved from a common African position on AI
while guaranteeing African AI sovereignty. This calls for regional coordination of AI strategies,
economic initiatives and policies."60
All African countries adhering to the Smart Africa Manifesto participate, with the founding
members being the African Union (AU Commission, NEPAD Agency, specialised institutions and
57Three African cities have some of the largest populations in the the world with Lagos, Nigeria leading
with~88,344,661inhabitants,followedbyKinshasainDRCwith~83,493,793inhabitantsandthenDarEs
Salaam, Tanzania at about 73,678,022.
58 Lannquist, Y., 2021, “Opportunities & Challenges of AI in Healthcare in Africa,” The Future Society.
https://thefuturesociety.org/2021/07/22/opportunities-challenges-of-ai-in-healthcare-in-africa/
59https://oecd.ai/en/dashboardsand The Future Society.
60Smart Africa, GIZ and GFA Consulting, “AI for Africa” Blueprint, 2021,
https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf

Regional Economic Communities), International Telecommunications Union (ITU), World Bank,
African Development Bank (AfDB), UN Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA), GSM
Alliance (GSMA), ICANN, African Telecommunications Union (ATU) and the Private Sector. The
Republic of South Africa, one of the Smart Africa member states, has committed to championing
the development of this blueprint as part of its flagship project, “4th Industrial Revolution:
innovation and artificial intelligence.”
Key Objectives:
● To outline the most relevant opportunities and challenges of the development and use of
AI for Africa and how to address them.
● To make concrete policy recommendations to harness the potential and mitigate the risk
of AI in African countries.
The report proposes the application of 6 principles to the development of an African AI Strategy:
● The inclusion of AI as part of a wider national strategy
● Balancing the development of an AI-enabling environment against ethical, legal and
governance considerations
● Underscoring the importance of both the process and the plan
● Focusing on action
● The application of an inclusive approach to AI by the people, for the people
● Leveraging the national AI strategy as a tool for communication
Key aspects of the report were presented by Khumbudzo Ntshavheni (Minister of the Ministry of
Communications and Digital Technologies, South Africa) in his Remarks on the Launch of
Africa's AI Blueprint at The Smart Africa Board Meeting on 10 November 2021:
● The African continent must set up regional Centres of Excellence for AI specialising in
different fields of AI to ensure cooperation and collaboration
● Ethical considerations and human development must remain the focal point in the
adoption and use of AI
● Data preservation is re-positioned as an economic tool that must be effectively managed
and utilised for the economic development of individual countries and the continent
● Specific economic sectors can be highly advanced through the adoption of AI and
through taking advantage of current plans
● Proposal for a high-level roadmap that member-states can consider in tackling AI
adoption and deployment
● Proposal for important policy and regulatory approaches to address AI risks

Enablers of the AI Ecosystem
Human Capital
Digital skills, Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) and Information
Communication Technology (ICT) education are critical to developing AI and digital economies.
Through its Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation, the government has embarked on
several initiatives to build the human capital of Ghana's digital economy. These initiatives are
mainly targeted at particular demographic groups to fill gaps. The digital skills programmes are
expected to equip and prepare the Ghanaian workforce for future work in emerging
technologies.
These initiatives include:
● Girls-In-ICT: targeted at building digital skills and talent development among girls.]
● Youth in ICT: digital and human capacity building among Ghanaian youth
● Youth Employment Agency (YEA): digital skills building towards human capacity
development among the unemployed youth in Ghana
● National Robotics Competition: STEM education through robotics competition among
16 selected senior high schools and five primary schools from May 2021
● NABCO61: Using drones to clean the natural environment has faced devastation over the
past years. In 2018 130 NABCO graduates were taken through drone piloting training at
the UMaT to start work as drone pilots for monitoring artisanal mining activities in the
various mining districts.
The Civil Society section of this report includes additional programs targeting AI skills
development for the community.
Innovation & Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship is a key vessel for AI adoption. With the pivotal goal of supporting and
ensuring thriving innovation clusters across the country, the Ghana Tech and Business Hubs
Network was established. Hubs like iSpace, Impact Hub, Kumasi Hive, the HOPin Academy,
iCode in Takoradi and Ho Node in the Volta Region have been operational. According to GIZ's
Make-IT, the innovation ecosystem in Ghana has developed enormously over the past couple of
years.
The following table provides background for Ghana’s innovation environment:
Indicators for Ghana’s innovation environment
61https://bestnewsgh.com/130-nabco-drone-pilots-for-illegal-mining-acquires-military-training-at-asut
suare-military-camp/

Index/Ranking Score
Global Competitiveness (n=141) 111
Financial system (n=141) 116
Market Capitalisation % GDP (n=141) 76
Venture Capital availability (1-7 (best)) 3
Legal framework's adaptability to digital business models (1–7 (best)) 4.0
ICT adoption (n=141) 90
Access to electricity (% of the population) 84
Innovation capability (n=141) 89
Unemployment rate (%) 7
Income Gini (0-1) (absolute inequality) 0.44
Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index 2019, World Bank Indicators, Oxford
Insights.
Ghana performs well relative to its peers in Sub-Saharan Africa: Rwanda, Benin, Tanzania,
Nigeria, and the Democratic Republic of Congo rank 100, 125, 117, 116, and 139, respectively,
on the same list. Specifically, Ghana scores very favourably on three key metrics: ICT adoption,
access to electricity, and innovation capability. However, it scores low on the health of its
financial system and the availability of venture capital. This indicates that the infrastructure for
rapid AI adoption and uptake is available, but the main bottleneck is potential entrepreneurs'
lack of access to funding for new ventures. Specifically, existing entrepreneurs cite the very high
collateral requirements for loans as a major barrier to starting any new venture62. This is
especially true in the ICT sector, where fixed assets that can be pledged as collateral for loans
often comprise only a small fraction of other major non-tangible assets like software intellectual
property. Venture capital fills this funding gap in the top-performing countries on the list. In
Ghana, the venture capital sector is still nascent and mainly focused on funding extraction
services, which explains the country’s low score in venture capital availability.
Incubators, Accelerators and Hubs
Currently, Ghana has more than 34 tech hubs located in Accra and the rest of the country.63 The
proliferation of startups and entrepreneurial activities in the tech space can be attributed to
high-quality talent and an ecosystem of players such as the Meltwater Entrepreneurial School of
Technology (MEST), Ghana GTL Incubator Programme, and the support of development
62http://hdl.handle.net/10986/36580
63https://make-it-initiative.org/africa/about/ghana/

partners or donors. For example, Ghana Tech Lab (GTL)64 is a joint venture between Innohub
Ghana and Kumasi Hive under the E-Transform Project of the Ministry of Communication and
Digitalisation and funded by the World Bank. GTL provides a tech space for competent digital
skills training, seeding innovations and growing startups.
Disrupt Africa (2018) reported that investments in Ghanaian startups accounted for 11.4% of
total African startup investments. A list of AI startups can be found in this report's ‘Private
Sector’ section.
The Ghana Tech Lab (GTL) Free Incubator Programme65
● In 2019, the programme enrolled 28 AI startup ideas from across the country. The
incubator aimed to help drive AI innovation in Ghana by providing entrepreneurs with
tangible resources and expert coaching ideas. Fifty-six entrepreneurs, divided into 28
teams of two, were selected to participate in the 10-week program after 300 individuals
participated in a six-week training programme organised by GTL in collaboration with
partner hubs across the country.
● Local hackathons allowed the entrepreneurs to pitch their ideas. The 28 projects
selected are to be provided with coaching and mentorship from industry experts,
exposure to industry events, and GHS 15,000 seed funding to help develop their ideas
into feasible startups.
● Fourteen Ghanaian AI startups in the incubator program pitched their innovative ideas to
compete with industries in Ghana and Africa.66 This came after the 6-week training
programme in AI to upskill, develop and grow viable startups that solve pertinent
problems in the country.
The Africa AI Accelerator Program in Ghana provides useful lessons for enabling
entrepreneurship in the nation.67
Digital Infrastructure
Digital foundations are necessary for an AI economy. Though Ghana's advancements in digital
infrastructure are strong, more progress is needed to enable AI practitioners and harness the
full potential of AI.68
The following are some projects that are either planned or ongoing to reinforce digital
infrastructure in Ghana:
64https://acceleration.ghanatechlab.com/
65https://disrupt-africa.com/2019/10/21/28-ai-ideas-enrolled-in-ghana-tech-lab-incubator/
66https://ghanatechlab.medium.com/
67Sey, A., and O. Mudongo. Case studies on AI skills capacity-building an AI in workforce development in
Africa. Artificial Intelligence for Development in Africa, Research ICT Africa.
https://researchictafrica.net/wp/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/AI-Capacity-Case-Studies-Final.pdf
68https://www.moc.gov.gh/projects

● E-Government Infrastructure Platform Project
An infrastructure by the National Information Technology Agency (NITA) to connect all
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) and Metropolitan, Municipal, and District
Assemblies (MMDAs) across Ghana. NITA has also built a Tier 3 data centre to host all
government applications and has decided to commercialise its excess capacity to generate
more revenue to support developmental work (Ghana Digital Economy Diagnostic, The World
Bank).
● E-Transform Project
Ghana has been a pioneer in the African telecommunications sector, leading the region in
market liberalisation deregulation and serving as a hub for submarine cables linking southern
and northern Africa to Europe with impressive internet bandwidth and improved communications
infrastructure. However, despite the recent significant increase in internet bandwidth and huge
price reduction of devices as well as usage charges, internet users in Ghana are still a small
share of the total population, and mobile broadband usage is low.
Indicator Baseline Current Target
(2013) (February 26, 2021) (October 31,
2023)
Average days required to process a 15 7 5
birth certificate
Average days required to process a 4 2 1
company registration
Number of new e-Government 3 7 7
applications providing services to
the public under the e-Transform
project
The number of new e-Services 8 15 16
available to the public online under
the project
The number of teachers and 0 0 150,000
students using education portals,
including those in rural areas.
Number of teachers and students 0 0 40
using education portals, including
those in the rural areas, which are
Females(%)
Source: GH eTransform Ghana|The World Bank
Intermediate result indicators from the e-Transform Project

Indicator Baseline Current Target
(2013-2020) (2020 - 2021) (2020 - 2023)
The Number of people trained under 0 9,943 3,000
the project
The Number of people trained, of 0 4,350 1,200
which the number of females trained
The Number of students and 0 200,000 150,000
teachers benefiting from enhanced
internet access
# of students and teachers 0 45 40
benefiting from enhanced internet
access of which are female(%)
The Number of transactions 0 120,000 100,000
processed under eProcurement and
e-Immigration systems
The Number of active judicial cases 0 51,232 90,000
processed through automated case
management systems in Ghana’s
Law Courts
The Number of locations of higher 27 35 60
education benefiting from enhanced
bandwidth
Tech Hubs in Ghana, supported by 0 3 3
the project
Number of pages of Government 17, 500,000 44,286,840 40,000,000
records digitised
Certification authorities' operations 0 1 1
in Ghana
The Number of locations of 0 180 240
Government Ministries,
Departments, and Agencies (MDAs)
benefiting from enhanced bandwidth
under the project
Source: GH eTransform Ghana|The World Bank
Telecommunications Infrastructure Indicators, 2017 for Ghana
Infrastructure Indices Score

Fixed Telephone lines/100 pop 1.05
Mobile Telephone Subscriptions/100 pop 127.46
Mobile Internet Users 100/pop 34.6
Mobile Internet Bandwidth, Mbps 7.11
Fixed Broadband internet users/100 pop 0.2
Fixed Line Broadband Bandwidth/Mbps 25.11
Mobile cellular prices in US$ 3.01
Source: ITU, 2017 | Adopted from Ghana Digital EconomyDiagnostic Stock Taking Report (2019)
● Eastern Corridor Fibre Optic Backbone
In 2008, the Government of Ghana initiated the nationwide e-Government infrastructure. The
infrastructure is intended to extend the national backbone infrastructure to all districts in the
country, provide national data centre facilities and connect all public institutions to single shared
communication and computing infrastructure to facilitate efficient delivery of government
services to businesses and others.
Submarine Cables In Ghana in 2017
As of 2017 Capacity Available to Operator (Gbps) Capacity Available in
use
Glo-Glo 1 20 6
MTN-WACS 25 20
Vodafone- SAT- 3 5.645 43.1
MainOne-MainOne 270 22.09
cable
Kasapa- Dolphin 20.6 1.15
Total 341.25 92.34 (usage 27%)
Source: Ghana Digital Economy Diagnostic Stock Taking Report(2019)|National Communications
Authority
Telecommunications Infrastructure Indicators, 2017 for Ghana
Infrastructure Indices Score
Fixed Telephone lines/100 pop 1.05

Mobile Telephone Subscriptions/100 pop 127.46
Mobile Internet Users 100/pop 34.6
Mobile Internet Bandwidth, Mbps 7.11
Fixed Broadband internet users/100 pop 0.2
Fixed Line Broadband Bandwidth/Mbps 25.11
Mobile cellular prices in US$ 3.01
Source: ITU, 2017 | Adopted from Ghana Digital EconomyDiagnostic Stock Taking Report(2019)
Cell phone coverage is high in Ghana: The GSM Association (GSMA) estimates 2021 coverage
at 94% and 88% for 2G and 3G, respectively. 4G coverage is estimated to be lower at
approximately 68%, although Ghana scores favourably to its peers in the region.
Cell Phone Coverage Comparison of Sub-Saharan African Countries
Country 3G Coverage 4G Coverage
Rwanda 82 85
Benin 89 60
Tanzania 81 55
Ghana 88 68
Nigeria 74 40
Sierra Leone 61 43
Democratic Republic of 52 41
Congo
Source: GSMA analysis of data sourced from mobile operators, GSMA Intelligence, Centre for
International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), household survey data, and Earth
Observations Group (2021).
These national averages hide a deep rural-urban divide. For example, rural areas in Ghana
have 4G coverage of only 41%, whereas urban coverage is more than twice that at 88%.
In addition to the wide disparity in cell phone coverage between rural and urban populations,
there seems to be a significant difference between cell phone coverage and internet usage.
GSMA further estimates that internet connectivity is only at 37% on average across the country.
Although Ghana has met the affordability goal of making 1GB of data cost less than 2% of the

average monthly income per capita, data plan affordability remains the largest barrier to entry
for a large number of people, especially in rural areas.
Internet Connectivity Comparison of Sub-Saharan African Countries
Country Connected % Usage Gap % Coverage Gap %
Rwanda 7.8 80.3 11.9
Benin 27.2 61.3 11.5
Tanzania 20.6 62.6 16.8
Ghana 37.0 51.4 11.6
Nigeria 32.9 42.6 24.5
Sierra Leone 10.9 47.4 41.7
Democratic Republic of Congo 17.7 36.3 46.0
Source: GSMA analysis of data sourced from mobile operators, GSMA Intelligence, Centre for
International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), household survey data, and Earth
Observations Group (2021)
The leader in internet connectivity among Sub-Saharan African countries is clearly Nigeria. This
comes as no surprise, given that Nigeria is the largest economy in the group by a large margin.
Therefore, it is encouraging to see Ghana following Nigeria for internet connectivity by a thin
margin. This is perhaps an indication that Ghana’s steps to reduce barriers to entry for internet
connectivity have succeeded. In fact, the data from GSMA shows that Ghana’s data plan costs
as a proportion of the monthly GDP per capita were the lowest among its Sub-Saharan African
peers in 2020. However, it is worth noting that there is a downward trend for all the countries in
the group for this time period, suggesting that people in Ghana looking to participate in the
development of AI technologies would have to compete fiercely with people in peer countries.
On the other hand, businesses looking to serve AI-enabled solutions now have a much larger
market for their products in Sub-Saharan Africa than before. The latter, coupled with Ghana's
participation and leadership in the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), could act as a
powerful incentive for entrepreneurs to create AI-enabled products.
Comparison of Cost of Data as Percentage of GDP Per Capita in 2016 and 2020
Country 2016 % 2020 %
Rwanda 3.1 3.1
Benin 9.6 4.2
Tanzania 3.1 2.6

Ghana 2.2 1.0
Nigeria 3.3 1.5
Sierra Leone 20.4 9.2
Democratic Republic of Congo 46.9 16.8
Source: GSMA analysis of data sourced from mobile operators, GSMA Intelligence, Center for
International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), household survey data, and Earth
Observations Group (2021)
Cell phone coverage and distribution across different areas of the country are crucial to
understanding not only people’s ability to participate in the digital (and AI) economy but also
their potential to benefit from AI-enabled services. In addition, people’s cell phone habits and
connectivity to the internet will also dictate the service delivery of AI solutions to a large extent.
Data Access
Data is essential fuel for training AI systems. Sponsored by the Ministry of Communications and
Digitalisation (MoCD), the Government of Ghana (GoG) has taken steps to support and promote
government data sharing by launching two initiatives, namely, the Ghana Open Data Initiative
(GODI) in 2012 and the Ghana Data Exchange Hub. The GODI secretariat is the focal place at
NITA to coordinate the initiative and respond to queries from the data user community. The
GODI is said to have created a central repository of datasets from 25 government agencies,
including The Energy Commission, the Ghana Statistical Service, and the Ministry of Finance69.
It is crucial to establish a governance framework for sharing government data, including
implementing the National Open Data Initiative. The introduction of these open data policies will
ultimately:
● Provide access to government data in a machine-readable format to enable the use of
data made possible by these initiatives and address the absence of harmonised
regulations, procedures, and strategies to manage and release government data.
● Establish calls for a comprehensive policy to guide government ministries, departments,
and agencies in sharing government data.
● As part of the GODI, a policy document dubbed the Ghana Data Sharing Policy was
developed in 2019.
● Also, a web portal (data.gov.gh) to enable proactive sharing and greater access to data
generated and commissioned by the ministries, departments, and agencies of the
Government of Ghana was developed to visualise key datasets in Ghana across
different socio-economic sectors.
The MoCD, through its agency NITA, has been embarking on a project to address GODI's
weaknesses since 2018. By June 2019, the GODI platform had hosted 90 datasets in open data
69Ghana Digital Economy Diagnostic Stock Taking Report, 2019

formats from 11 agencies. In addition, the World Bank's Ghana Digital Economy Diagnostic
(2019) has reported that the MoCD has submitted a new draft policy on data sharing to the
cabinet that envisions three phases: portal to receive datasets; building the ecosystem around
the use of the datasets (for example, hackathons); and training for MDAs on data and change
management. However, there are notable gaps in data access:
1. The absence of an open data license attached to government-produced datasets means
that not all the data available on the data.gov.gh website is legally open according to
international standards.
2. The currently available datasets are, for the most part, outdated, and some are not in the
format for machine-readable or data processing.
3. There is no data collection procedure in place between MDAs focal points and GODI -
data officers still collect siloed datasets from each MDA.70
Key Stakeholders
Given many initiatives and policies for digital development in Ghana, it is essential to coordinate
and harmonise across all of the relevant stakeholders from the public sector (regulators,
ministries, departments, and agencies), private sector (corporates and start-ups), civil society,
and academia.
Public Sector
Key public sector actors important to the National AI Strategy include:
● Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation (MoCD)
○ Cyber Security Authority
○ Data Protection Commission
○ Kofi Annan Centre
● National Communications Authority (NCA)
● Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology, and Innovation (MESTI)
● Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources (MLR)
● Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MoF/MoFEP)
● Bank of Ghana (BoG)
● National Information Technology Agency (NITA)
● National Development Planning Commission (NDPC)
● Ghana Revenue Authority
● Ministry of Gender
Ministries that can advise and support responsible AI adoption in key sectors, such as the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Trade and Industry,
70 World Bank Group. 2019. Ghana Digital Economy Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington,DC.©World
Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/34366 Licence: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

Ministry of Transport. The Ghana Enterprises Agency under the Ministry of Trade & Industry will
be a key actor in supporting SMEs.

Private Sector
The AI ecosystem builds upon an existing and growing digital ecosystem, including the following
leading actors.
Google AI Centre, Accra
In April 2019, the Google Artificial intelligence (AI) research laboratory was opened in Accra,
Ghana – the first on African soil. The lab uses AI to develop healthcare, education, and
agriculture solutions to improve lives and reduce inequalities (Moustapha Cisse, Head of
Google AI Centre). Google is also said to be working with universities and startups in Ghana,
Nigeria, Kenya, and South Africa to enhance AI development to build products that can solve
Africa's problems today.
Key Objective(s):
● For specialist engineers and AI researchers to collaborate with local organisations and
policymakers.
● To bring together top machine learning researchers and engineers to develop new AI
applications. The centre will collaborate with local universities and research centres to
build products to solve Africa's urgent problems.
● To focus on enhancing Google Translate's ability to capture African languages more
precisely.
Google's reasons for choosing Ghana to build its AI laboratory:
1. Ghana has a relatively stable electricity supply
2. Relative security
3. A decent internet infrastructure resulting from an extensive fibre optics backbone in
Accra
4. Ghana has one of the best travel and tourist locations in the region
5. A healthy pool of academic institutions with significant infrastructure
6. A hub of quality education
Glovo: Using AI for convenient shopping
Glovo71 is a Spanish on-demand delivery digital application that uses AI technology to predict
and suggest services close to customers depending on their location and previous order
experiences. It is said to be present in 23 countries, with Africa representing 30% of its
geographical footprint. The delivery service is taking advantage of the smartphone penetration
in Ghana to bring the mobile app-based delivery service to the Greater Accra Region (Accra
and Tema).
In the Africa Region, Ghana is said to be outpacing its peers in the adoption of mobile
technologies; Ghana is second place behind South Africa.
71Techcrunch, 2021, “Glovo to double down African Investments in the next 12 months: But will it stay
put?”https://techcrunch.com/2021/09/07/glovo-to-double-down-african-investment-in-the-next-12-monthsbut-will-it-stay-put/

Mobile and Internet Usage & Growth
ADOPTION/GROWTH
+2.1% +8.1% +6.4% +36.7%
(Jan 2021 Vs Jan 2020) (Jan 2021 Vs Jan 2020) (Jan 2021 Vs Jan 2020) (Jan 2021 Vs Jan 2020)
+655 Thousand +3.1 Million +943 Thousand +2.2 Million
Source:DataReportal|Hootsuite
Glovo was readily welcomed in the e-commerce market with the increase in the demand for
convenient shopping. Glovo was well-positioned to play the role of the third party that ensures
that its partners, be it pharmaceuticals, food, or groceries shops, can reach their customers at
their convenience. Apart from the high penetration rate of smartphones and the widespread
adoption of mobile payments being success factors for Glovo, there is also the factor of Google
Maps, making use of AI technology. Based on Google Maps AI technology that has
revolutionised the logistics industry in Ghana, Glovo is able to present to its users information
such as restaurants nearby or the nearest service provider once a user selects their location.
Digital Payments Size & Growth of Market (January 2020 Vs January 2021)
DIGITAL PAYMENTS - SIZE AND GROWTH OF THE MARKET (IN USD)
# Of People Making Total Annual Value Of Annual Change In The Average Value Of Annual
Digitally Enabled Digitally Enabled Digitally Enabled Transactions Per User
Payments Transactions Consumer Payments Consumer Payments
6.62 MILLION $ 2.97 BILLION +56.2% $449
Source:DataReportal|Hootsuite
Uber - AI for ride-hailing, predicting fares, time of travel, and rider safety
Uber was the first ride-hailing company to enter Ghana's emerging market with its mobile
app-based transportation service. Uber's service offered an alternative means of transportation
to the Ghanaian middle class and students. This segment of society preferred the convenience
of ordering a taxi cab from the comfort of their current locations instead of walking some
distance to hail taxis or "hop-in-hop-out" of the usually poorly ventilated and the
"ready-for-the-scrap-buyers" popular public bus service in ghana called the "trotro." The issue of
security during travel is one major challenge that ride-hailing apps like Uber have addressed.
Besides the convenience and consistency offered as part of their services, the assurance of the
security of a rider makes Uber a preferred choice.
NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute
NVIDIA offers local AI training with ongoing practical application experience in partnership with
the Ghana Artificial Intelligence Association of Ghana.

NVIDIA’s Head of Emerging Areas, Kate Kallot, highlighted the importance of individual AI
developers, grassroots communities, and start-ups for AI innovation on the African continent.
NVIDIA’s Emerging Chapters Programme is specifically for Africa and other emerging markets
with grassroots communities that need to build and scale their AI projects (TechCabal, 2020). AI
communities in Africa consist of "individual developers who run their incubators, do their own AI
research, and partner with the government and international organisations." NVIDIA supports
the communities with workshops by its AI experts through the Deep Learning Institute
Programme and provides its hardware to them.72
Huawei Technologies Ghana
● 10- Day Residential Training in Artificial Intelligence73:
In September of 2021, Huawei Technologies Ghana partnered with the Government of Ghana
through its Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation (MoCD) to train fifty (50) women in
about eight universities across the various regions in Ghana at a 10-day residential training in
AI. The training was part of a tertiary edition of the ministry’s Girls in ICT Programme aimed at
training more women in basic information communication technologies like Artificial Intelligence,
Cyber Security, Storage, Big Data, Internet of Things (IoT) and Cloud Service, commenced.
● Seeds for the Future-Women in Tech Programme74:
Again, in collaboration with the MoCD, Huawei Technologies Ghana launched the “first-all
women” edition of Huawei’s company’s corporate social responsibility programme called the
Seed for the Future in October 2021. The Seed for the Future programme aimed to develop the
ICT skills of sixty (60) young women beneficiaries for the 2021 programme by enhancing
knowledge transfer, promoting a greater understanding of the telecommunications sector, and
bridging the communication gap between countries.
Some of the activities for the programme included 5G, Artificial Intelligence, Cloud, Big Data,
IoT, Smart City, and Cybersecurity. The programme was also specifically designed to bridge the
gender gap in technology.
● LEAP, a digital skills programme targeting 100K Africans75:
Another way Huawei Technologies contributes to the AI ecosystem through skills development
is through its LEAP - Leadership, Employability, Advancement and Possibilities - a digital skills
development programme aiming to upskill over 100,000 Africans. The LEAP programme, which
is supposed to run for three (3) years, will focus on fostering strong digital leadership and a
skilled ICT workforce, building a digital talent pool, and promoting digital literacy among citizens.
72https://techcabal.com/2022/02/16/inside-nvidia-plans-to-develop-africas-ai-ecosystem/
73https://thebftonline.com/2021/09/24/govt-huawei-to-train-50-students-in-ai/
74https://moc.gov.gh/60-female-students-benefit-huawei-programme
75https://www.itnewsafrica.com/2022/04/new-huawei-programme-to-upskill-100000-people-across-sub-saharan-africa/

● €155 million project to boost basic telephony services in rural areas76
The MoCD through Ghana Investment Fund for Electronic Communications (GIFEC), in
November 2020 unveiled a €155 million project to boost basic telephony services in rural areas.
This project is backed by Huawei’s Rural Stark Technology, which will provide the gear for more
than 1,000 cell sites to be built across the country at the end of 2020, according to the project.
This project aims to serve 3 million Ghanaians to be connected to “reduce the gap in the digital
divide” in underserved communities, particularly people from the Atwereboana in the Ashanti
Region. Boosting the telephone service in rural areas will impact “around 30% of Ghana’s
population” who live in rural areas with little or no access to IT and communications
services.
● 200 Smartphones to boost rural digitalisation
Further to Huawei’s support of the Rural Telephone Project, the company September 2021
donated 200 smartphones to support the digitalisation of some rural communities.
● Full solution for 1GW/500MWh Ghana solar-plus-storage project
In the power sector, Huawei’s full solution 1GW/500MWh Ghana solar-plus-storage project is a
move that will create possibilities and opportunities for intelligent power management that could
make use of automation and, for that matter, AI.
MTN Ghana looking at AI to help Fight Mobile Money Fraud
In September 2022, the Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications, in a publication, reported that
the mobile telecommunications operator MTN announced its move to employ the use of AI
technology through an AI system to help the operator fight Mobile Money fraud in the first
quarter of 2020.77 MTN believes this investment in a security system with AI capabilities will help
MTN secure its platforms against the activities of fraudsters.
Vodafone Ghana’s Digital Assistant
TOBi78, Vodafone’s digital assistant, a AI-powered chatbot, is designed to bring 24-hour
assistance to the telecoms company’s customers. Vodafone aims to use this AI-powered
assistant to help improve customer queries and the company’s response time. The chatbox is
also supposed to reduce the number of calls received at Vodafone’s customer experience
centre. TOBi is said to perform basic customer care functions with a vision to improve its
abilities with time.
CSquared and GRIDCo
76https://developingtelecoms.com/telecom-business/telecom-regulation/10295-ghana-huawei-unveil-155-million-ruralconnectivity-project.html
77https://thebftonline.com/2020/10/13/mtn-to-deploy-ai-others-to-fight-momo-fraud-2/
78https://thebftonline.com/2020/10/21/vodafones-friendly-digital-assistant-tobi-now-on-whatsapp/

79Another digital infrastructure initiative supporting the AI ecosystem development is the
agreement between CSquared and Ghana Grid Company Limited (GRIDCo). CSquared, a
broadband infrastructure provider, agreed with GRIDCo to lease GRIDCo’s excess fibre
capacity to mobile network operators and internet service providers in Ghana. The agreement is
said to be aimed at enabling the deployment of broadband infrastructure to deliver
high-speed data services to businesses and homes while focusing on remote areas.
VRA Smart City Project
In 2020, as the Volta River Authority(VRA) launched its 60th anniversary, the company looked at
digitisation, smart cities and electric vehicles. The VRA’s smart city project seeks to transform
the township of Akosombo into a smart city and make it a technology hub for Ghana. This move
by the VRA is an opportunity to contribute to the development of the AI ecosystem and create
jobs and opportunities for ecosystem actors equipped with AI capabilities.
TechGulf and Graphic Communication Group Limited Sign MOU for Digitisation
This project will run over two years to digitise the Graphic Communications Group Limited
(GCGL) newspaper publications from 1950 to 2000. The MOU also covers a project to digitise
all in-house administrative forms and memos to enhance the company’s operations.80 The
digitisation of GCGL’s newspaper publications spanning 50 years will provide the AI ecosystem
with historical data for training.
List of AI Startups in Ghana (non-exhaustive)
STARTUP SECTOR
Kudigo Retail and E-Commerce
Triva Financial Services
Complete Farmer Agriculture
minoHealth Health
Health Direct Global Health
Superfluid Labs Technology
BACE Group Software & Technology
Mazumma FinTech
Clearspace Labs Technology
Niqao E-Commerce
79https://developingtelecoms.com/telecom-business/telecom-investment-mergers/11004-fibre-capacity-deal-aims-to-e
nhance-internet-access-in-ghana.html
80https://www.graphic.com.gh/

Okuafo Foundation Agriculture
Fineazy Financial Services
KaraAgro AI Agriculture, AgriTech
Raba Rides Transportation & Logistics
Utaska Domestic & Professional Services
SuaCode Education
Npontu Big Data Analytics
Impact Tactics Robotics Process Automation
Academia
Higher education and research institutions in the country are strong enablers of an AI
ecosystem. These spaces train practitioners and offer leading researchers and engineers the
opportunities to explore various innovations. During these experiments and investigations,
challenging questions on the impact of the technology and, for that matter, AI are debated - an
invaluable source of reference for policymaking and development of AI solutions and
applications that could lead to solving some of the most pressing national challenges.
Examples of programmes and initiatives in academia driving AI in Ghana:
● Academic City University College81 - The university announced six months ago that it
had received approval from the Ghana Tertiary Education Commission to offer a degree
in BSc Artificial Intelligence covering "unique and futuristic courses" such as AI, Robotics
and Biomedical. As a result, the university college became the first in Africa to offer a
degree in AI. The accreditation aligns with the college's commitment to "equip students
with the requisite hands-on practical training and education to be Future-ready".
● African Institute of Mathematical Sciences (AIMS): The African Masters in Machine
Intelligence brings AI education to Africa and contributes to building an ecosystem of AI
practitioners committed to positively impacting our societies. It is a fully-funded one-year
intensive graduate program that provides young Africans with state-of-the-art training in
machine learning and its applications. One of its goals is to prepare well-rounded
machine intelligence researchers who will respond to the present and future needs of
Africa and the world. AMMI was launched at AIMS Ghana in 2019.82
81https://blog.acity.edu.gh/2021/08/29/academic-city-introduces-a-degree-in-artificial-intelligence-first-in-af
rica/
82https://aims.edu.gh/african-masters-in-machine-learning/

● Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST)83 - The university
was awarded a grant to fund the establishment of a Responsible Artificial Intelligence
Lab (RAIL) under the AI4D Africa Multidisciplinary Labs project initiated by International
Development Research Centre (IDRC) in January this year. RAIL aims to develop talents
in data science and machine learning to help bridge the widening skills gap needed to
champion Ghana's digital economic transformation agenda and the sub-region. Hosted
by the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, this will be a centrally networked
lab infrastructure, which will provide computing, research, training, and expertise transfer
to satellite laboratories at Universitée Alioune Diop de Bambey (Senegal), The University
of Cape Verde, and The Gambia Technical Training Institute. The lab's main activities will
involve: promoting the digitalisation of products, processes, and services via innovative
toolbox development for renewable energies, health, agriculture, and climate change
use cases in close collaboration with local small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and governmental bodies.
● Responsible AI in Africa (RAIN) Network: IEAI collaboration with the Faculty of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, KNUST84
The Responsible AI Network (RAIN)85– Africa was founded through a partnership
between the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology (KNUST) in Ghana and the Institute for Ethics in
Artificial Intelligence (IEAI) at the Technical University of Munich in Germany with the aim
is to build a network of scholars working on the responsible development and use of AI
in Africa. The growing need to understand how AI may impact or be accepted by society
in various regions worldwide has resulted in the effort to build a network of scholars
working on the responsible development and use of AI in Africa. Key objectives:
● To bring together emerging researchers to discuss and build joint projects on the
ethical and social challenges arising at the intersection of technology and human
values, specifically related to sustainable development.
● The network will provide a platform to promote cross-regional and
interdisciplinary research collaboration through a series of virtual and in-person
workshops.
● University of Ghana86 - In a quest to highlight how Africa could capitalise on the power
and benefits of AI to induce development, the university department of Computer
Science, in collaboration with Google Africa, organised a symposium in June 2019 on
the theme; "Challenging the status quo: The Role of Artificial Intelligence in Africa".
83www.knust.edu.gh
84https://ieai.mcts.tum.de/responsible-ai-in-africa-network/
85Responsible AI Network - Africa, https://rainafrica.org/.Retrieved on March 8, 2022.
86https://www.ug.edu.gh/news/university-ghana-hosts-google-ai-symposium

Civil Society & Community
The civil society and nonprofit community contributing to the AI ecosystem development in
Ghana is diverse.
Numerous organisations are supporting digital and AI skills development in Ghana, such as:
● AmaliTech87
● Blossom Academy88
● Artificial Intelligence Association of Ghana - “An AI community for Ghana by Ghanaians"
that gathers the community for occasional discussions and events.
● Africa Digital Rights Hub
● Deep Learning Indaba and Women in ML and Data Science (WiMLDS) Accra chapters
● Ghana Natural Language Processing (NLP)89 - an open source Initiative focused on NLP
for Ghanaian languages with applications for local problems
● Python Ladies in Accra
The Tony Blair Institute for Global Change is a not-for-profit supporting government capacity
with offices in several African cities. The Accra office serves as its hub on the African continent
for AI governance and ethics.
AI Impact on Gender Diversity and Bias
The 2021 report “Engendering Artificial Intelligence: A gender and ethics perspective on AI in
Africa” by Policy90 outlines the factors that drive or hinder AI innovation and ethical concerns
surrounding the impact of AI on women in the African context.
Since AI systems are trained on data, populations that are underrepresented in digital data for
certain use cases will experience less accurate predictions and outcomes. The use of AI
systems that are not trained on representative data can perpetuate existing biases and widen
the gap between genders - for example, in 91Ghana’s workforce, the gender parity for tech roles
and wage equality indices are scored at 4 on a scale of 1-7 and 43 out of a 153 ranking
respectively. However, adopting AI tools could be handy where employers must match skills with
jobs and match women with tech or AI skills to available jobs to mitigate biased hiring
programmes.
AI can provide the tools to bridge the gender and diversity gap in sectors such as fintech and
healthcare. For example, AI can help identify women in low-income homes to target financial
inclusion products or training or recommend tailored financial products. In healthcare, AI can
87https://amalitech.org/
88https://www.blossom.africa/
89https://ghananlp.org/
90 Borokini, F., Nabulega, S., Achieng’, G., 2021, Engendering AI: A Gender and Ethics Perspective on
Artificial Intelligence in Africa. Pollicy. https://pollicy.org/resource/engendering-artificial-intelligence/
91WEF Global Competitiveness Index 2019, World Bank Indicators, Oxford Insights

help reduce maternal mortality through tracking, engagement and precision monitoring of
pregnant and nursing mothers throughout their prenatal to postnatal cycles. However, the same
technology can also present products and biases that exclude certain groups or minorities. For
example, low-income groups and poor credit scoring could be left out of financial products that
provide access to loans from financial institutions.
The following table identifies trends in gender diversity in Ghana.
Gender Diversity Indicators For Ghana
Index/Ranking Score
Workforce Diversity (1-7 (best)) 5
Gender parity in tech roles, (1-7 (best)) 4
Gender wage equality for similar work (rank/153) 46
Female legislators, senior officials, and managers, % 42
Global Gender Gap Index ((0-1) gender parity 0.7
AI Government Readiness Index (172) 91
Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Index 2019, World Bank Indicators, Oxford Insights
Development Partners & Institutions
Through its Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation (MoCD), the government is leading
the development of Ghana's National Artificial Intelligence Strategy, with support from GIZ FAIR
Forward and Smart Africa, which The Future Society facilitates. The Future Society is a
non-profit bringing expertise in AI policy, having recently supported Rwanda's National AI
Strategy and other international AI policies.
From Autumn 2021 To spring 2022, The UN Global Pulse is undertaking a parallel project to
develop AI ethical guidelines for Ghana.
GIZ FAIR Forward92
The National AI strategy will be supported through GIZ's FAIR Forward, which has the main
goals to:
1. Remove entry barriers to AI – Access to training data and AI technologies for local
innovation;
92https://www.giz.de/expertise/html/61982.html

2. Strengthen local technical know-how on AI – Capacity development in Africa and Asia;
3. Develop policy frameworks ready for AI – Ethical AI, data protection and privacy.
Smart Africa
SMART Africa is borne from an alliance of 30 African Heads of State and Government to
accelerate sustainable socio-economic development on the continent, ushering Africa into a
knowledge economy through affordable access to broadband and ICT usage.93 The group is
leading an AI working group with experts from the Member States, the private sector,
international organisations, donors, academia and entrepreneurs for an AI blueprint for Africa.
The AI blueprint for Africa hinges on the background that "successful global cooperation is best
achieved from a common African position on AI while guaranteeing African AI sovereignty. This
calls for regional coordination of AI strategies, economic initiatives and policies. Moving forward
together and encouraging mutual learning among African governments, regulators, and
societies promises to increase efficiency and leverage each partner's strengths in the regional
development of AI."94
The SMART Africa Alliance has five pillars which reflect the five principles of the Smart Africa
Manifesto. These pillars are (1) Policy, (2) Access, (3) e-Government, (4) Private
Sector/Entrepreneurship and (5) Sustainable Development.95
93https://smartafrica.org/who-we-are/
94https://smart.africa/board/login/uploads/70029-eng_ai-for-africa-blueprint.pdf
95https://smartafrica.org/who-we-are/

Policy Context
The Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation (MoCD) has recently announced plans to
develop regulations on AI. The ministry announced at the Data Protection Week celebration in
January 2022 that Ghana will soon have its own AI regulation to guide the use of AI for
stakeholders, as reported in an online news article by myjoyonline. The deputy minister stated
that the need to regulate AI use is to meet the growing demand for technological advancement
in the country.
There are several key policies aimed at driving digital innovation and development in Ghana,
such as:
● Payment Systems and Services Act (PSSA), 2019 (Act 987)
● The National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy
● Digital Financial Services (DFS) Policy
● The Ghana Digital Payments Roadmap
● ICT4AD Policy 2003
● National Telecommunications Policy 2004
● National Communications Authority Act of 2008 (Act 769)
● Electronic Communications Act (Act 775)
● Electronic Communications Act (Act 786)
● Electronic Transactions Act (Act 772) 21
● National Information Technology Agency Act (Act 771)
● National Communications Authority Act (Act 769)
● Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) Broadcasting Policy (2016)
● Cyber Security Act 2020
● Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology, and Innovation (MESTI) Innovation
Policies
Ongoing relevant policies that are yet to be launched by MoCD:
● Ghana Digital Economy Policy
● Ghana Integrated Digital Transformation Blueprint

Key Policies Driving Digital Innovation in Ghana
Policy 1
Payment Systems and Services Act (PSSA), 2019 ( Act 987)
Description
AN ACT to amend and consolidate the laws relating to payment systems
payment services and regulate institutions that carry on payment service
and electronic money business and provide for related matters
Owned By
The Bank of Ghana
Key Objectives
To amend the existing legislation relating to payment systems and services
in Ghana
Applies to
(a) A Bank
(b) A specialised deposit-taking institution
(c) A dedicated electronic money issuer, a payment service provider,
(d) An affiliate of a bank, a specialised deposit-taking institution or
a financial holding company, an agent of a bank, a specialised
deposit-taking institution, a dedicated electronic money issuer or
a payment service provider.
(e) An affiliate of a bank, a specialised deposit-taking institution or
a financial holding company, and
(f) An agent of a bank, a specialised deposit-taking institution, a
dedicated electronic money issuer or a payment service provider
When it was
13 May 2019
enacted
Policy 2
The National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy
Description
Developed in collaboration with the World Bank, it aims at increasing
financial inclusion from 58 per cent to 85 per cent by 2023, helping create
economic opportunities and reducing poverty.
Owned By
MoF/MoFEP, BoG
Key Objectives
To increase the adult population's access to formal financial services from
58 per cent to 85 per cent by 2023.
Applies to
Financial Services
When it was

enacted

Policy 3
Digital Financial Services (DFS) Policy
Description
It serves as a blueprint for how Ghana can leverage digital finance to
achieve its financial inclusion goals. Covering four years and six thematic
areas, the DFS Policy clearly outlines the steps the Government and industry
can take to bolster the country's DFS ecosystem.
Owned By
MoF/MoFEP, BoG
Key Objectives
To build on technological advances to create a resilient, inclusive and
innovative DFS ecosystem that contributes to social development and a
robust economy with a thriving private sector.
Applies to
Financial Services
When it was

enacted
Policy 4
The Ghana Digital Payments Roadmap
Description
Designed in collaboration with the United Nations-based Better Than Cash
Alliance, puts forward concrete steps to build an inclusive digital payments
ecosystem. This includes better access to financial services, enabling
regulation and oversight, and promoting consumer protection.
Owned By
MoF/MoFEP, BoG
Key Objectives
To leverage the efficiencies that digitisation brings to make savings in
government operations and to increase the collection of government
revenues
Applies to
Financial Services
When it was

enacted
Policy 5
ICT4AD Policy 2003
Description
The policy sets the road map for developing Ghana's information society
and economy. It provides a basis for facilitating the country's
socio-economic development in the emerging information, knowledge and
technological age to be dominated by information and knowledge-based
economies.
Owned By
MoCD

Key Objectives
To engineer an ICT-led socio-economic development process with the
potential to transform Ghana into a middle-income, information-rich,
knowledge-based and technology-driven economy and society.
Applies to
ICT Services and Industrial sectors
When it was
March 2003
enacted
Policy 6
National Telecommunications Policy 2004
Description
This policy aims to define the framework within which the Ghana
telecommunications sector will evolve towards a vision of bringing Ghana
further toward the realisation of a true Information Society, which includes
all citizens and provides the greatest opportunity for economic growth,
social participation and personal expression.
Owned By
MoCD, NCA
Key Objectives
Every citizen and resident of the Republic of Ghana shall have high-quality,
affordable access to information and communication services to help
transform Ghana into a knowledge-based society and technology-driven
economy.
Applies to
Telecommunications Industry, ISPs
When it was
March 2003
enacted
Policy 7
National Communications Authority Act of 2008 (Act 769)
Description
AN ACT to establish the National Communications Authority as the central
body to license and regulate communications activities and services in the
country; and to provide for related purposes.
Owned By
MoCD, NCA
Key Objectives
It is to regulate the provision of communications services in the country.
Applies to
Telecommunications Industry
When it was

enacted
Policy 8
Electronic Communications Act (Act 775)

Description
AN ACT to provide for the regulation of electronic communications, the
regulation of broadcasting, the use of the electromagnetic spectrum and
related matters.
Owned By
NCA, MoCD
Key Objectives
Applies to
Telecoms Network Operators & Service Providers
When it was

enacted
Policy 9
Electronic Communications Act (Act 786)
Description
AN ACT to amend the Electronic Communications Act, 2008(Act 775) to
provide a minimum rate for international incoming electronic
communication traffic and related matters.
Owned By
NCA, MoCD
Key Objectives
Applies to
Telecoms Network Operators & Service Providers
When it was

enacted

Policy 10
Electronic Transactions Act (Act 772) 21
Description
AN ACT to provide for the regulation of electronic communications and
related transactions and to provide for connected purposes
Owned By
NCA, MoCD
Key Objectives
The object of this Act is to provide for and facilitate electronic
communications and related transactions in the public interest
Applies to
Electronic transactions and electronic records of any type
When it was

enacted
Policy 11
National Information Technology Agency Act (Act 771)
Description
AN ACT tht established the National Information Technology Agency to
regulate information communications technology and to provide related
purposes.
Owned By
MoCD, NITA
Key Objectives
It is to regulate the provision of information communications technology,
ensure the provision of quality information communications technology,
promote efficiency standards and ensure high service quality.
Applies to
ICT Sector
When it was
enacted 2008

Policy 12
National Communications Authority Act (Act 769)
Description
AN ACT to establish the National Communications Authority as the central
body to licence and regulate communications activities and services in the
country; and to provide for related purposes.
Owned By
NCA, MoCD
Key Objectives
It is to regulate the provision of communications services in the country.
Applies to
Providers of public communications services
When it was
enacted 2008
Policy 13
Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) Broadcasting Policy (2016)
Description
A single national FTA digital signal multiplex platform will be created for all
broadcasters utilising the same frequencies to transmit digital TV signals to
homes across the country. Current frequency allocation to a single
broadcaster should be capable of delivering signals for a minimum of
twenty (20) standard definition (SD) programme channels to be created per
multiplex and in accordance with the national transmission and
compression standard (DVB-T2/MPEG-4).
Owned By
MoCD, NCA
Key Objectives
(a) To create the policy environment for the smooth migration of
analogue broadcasting to digital terrestrial television (DTT)
broadcasting.
(b) To guarantee the availability of all existing terrestrial analogue
television stations in digital formats in at least their current
coverage areas.
(c) To make available to all existing television households access to
digital television services and ensure universal access to
free-to-air television services.
(d) To allow a dual illumination period not exceeding the second
quarter of 2020.
(e) To ensure the availability of digital Set-top boxes that conform to
Ghana DTT receiver specification and its subsequent reviews in
the market.
(f) As much as possible, adopt and implement a framework to
provide Set-top boxes (fully or partially subsidised) to the
citizenry with emphasis on the aged, persons with disability etc.,

based on the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP)
system.
(g) To free up the relevant spectrum of economic value from the
broadcasting service for telecommunication and any other
services of value to the state.
(h) To promote environmental sanity through co-location of
broadcast transmission infrastructure.
(i) To encourage the promotion of local content towards growth
and job creation in the sector.
(j) To set up a commercially oriented corporate body, Central
Digital Transmission Company Limited (CDTCL), to run the
platform for long-term viability and growth.
Applies to
Television and Radio Broadcasting
When it was

enacted
Policy 14
Cyber Security Act 2020
Description
AN ACT to establish the Cyber Security Authority to regulate cybersecurity
activities in the country, promote the development of cybersecurity in the
country and provide for related matters.
Owned By
Cyber Security Authority
Key Objectives
(a) Regulate cybersecurity activities in the country;
(b) Prevent, manage and respond to cybersecurity threats and
cybersecurity incidents;
(c) Regulate owners of critical information infrastructure in respect
of cybersecurity activities, cybersecurity service providers and
practitioners in the country;
(d) Promote the development of cybersecurity in the country to
ensure a secure and resilient digital ecosystem;
(e) Establish a platform for cross-sector engagement on matters of
cybersecurity for effective coordination and cooperation between
key public institutions and the private sector;
(f) Create awareness of cybersecurity matters; and
(g) Collaborate with international agencies to promote the
cybersecurity of the country.
Applies to
Cybersecurity activities in the country

When it was
enacted 2020
Policy 15
Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation
(MESTI) Innovation Policy
Description
In line with MESTI's mandate to promote science and technology application
and to create the conditions and enabling environment for innovation to
occur, MESTI has presented the National Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy, which aims, in broad terms, to provide a framework for
stimulating innovation in the economy and the society.
https://mesti.gov.gh/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Draft-National-STI-Polic
y-Document-10-July-2017.pdf
Owned By
MESTI
Key Objectives
Basic Objectives
(a) Facilitate mastering of scientific and technological capabilities by
a critical mass of the products of all institutions;
(b) Provide the framework for inter-institutional efforts in
developing STI and programmes in all sectors of the economy to
provide for the basic needs of the society;
(c) Create the conditions for the improvement of scientific and
technological infrastructure for research and development and
innovation;
(d) Ensure that STI supports Ghana's trade and export drive for
greater competitiveness and promotes a science and technology
culture in society.
Long-term objectives (ten years and beyond)
(e) To create endogenous science and technology capacities
appropriate to national needs, priorities and resources
(f) To create a science and technology culture whereby solutions to
socio-cultural and economic problems of individual Ghanaians,
their communities and the nation as a whole are recognised and
sought within the domain of science and technology
Medium-Term Objectives(between five and ten years)
(g) To accelerate the promotion of innovation through the
development and utilisation of modern scientific and
technological capabilities to provide for the basic needs of the
citizenry
(h) To create the conditions for Ghana's competitiveness.
Short-Term Objectives(up to five years)

(i) To restructure the entire science and technology machinery,
infrastructure and programmes to make them more responsive
to national needs and priorities in all sectors of the economy
Applies to
All ministries, departments, agencies, and sectors for social and economic
development.
When it was
enacted May 2017
Yet to be launched Digital Innovation Policies by MoCD:
Policy 16
Ghana Digital Economy Policy
Description
The Government of Ghana, acting through the Ministry of Communications
and Digitalisation, in keeping pace with the global agenda of developing
smart ecosystems, as a catalyst for digital transformation, is rolling out a
Digital Economy Policy.
Owned By
GoG, MoCD
Key Objectives
To propel the entire traditional economy through the digitalisation drive for
year-on-year progressive transformation impact improvement.
Applies to
All sectors
Policy 17
Ghana Integrated Digital Transformation Blueprint
Description
The Ghana Integrated Digital Transformation Blueprint (GIDTB) - a first of its
kind - is a workable framework of the Government of Ghana (GoG) that
stipulates pivotal actions, provides concrete steps and lays out a trackable
path to achieving a digital society that responds to the changing dynamics
of the times and empowers people and businesses to thrive by 2030.
Owned By
GoG, MoCD, MOFEP
Key Objectives
(a) Present a trackable and measurable framework for achieving
Integrated Digital Transformation for Ghana over the next ten
years;
(b) Ensure sustainable digital transformation by establishing the
guiding principles and shared values for delivering Ghana's
Integrated Digital Transformation Agenda;

(c) Identify critical sectors to anchor Ghana's Integrated Digital
Transformation journey for ultimately the benefit of the people
of Ghana;
(d) Deepen coordination among key stakeholders to harmonise the
implementation of the critical Digital Initiatives;
(e) Establish opportunities for resource mobilisation, investments
and innovative financing through the government's sources, the
private sector, development partners, and other
non-governmental sources.
Applies to
All sectors of the economy
Period
2021-2030
Digitisation Initiatives and Programmes96
I. MDAs Public Records Digitisation
Under the e-Transform project, the government, through the MoCD, aims to convert public
records into digital forms from different government entities that could be integrated to provide
more seamless and efficient public service delivery. Furthermore, the initiative aims to support
more timely and accurate data for an Open Data Portal. In addition, digitising all public records
is a great job creating opportunities for unemployed youth with digital skills.
II. MDAs Digitisating Capacity Building Programme
In collaboration with the Rockefeller Foundation Digital Jobs For Africa initiative, the World
Bank's team supported the government's digitisation efforts by delivering a capacity-building
programme in 2014. The programme mainly sought to build the institutional capacity of priority
government agencies managing critical public records and therefore strongly needs digitisation.
The focus of the capacity-building programme was how MDAs could manage their digitisation
programmes in a more structured and sustainable manner.
III. E-learning Portal For MDAs
Through the digitisation programme of public records done as part of the e-Transform project,
digital content was developed, and an e-learning portal was launched. The e-learning portal
would provide "continuous self-paced learning opportunities" for MDA staff. Ultimately, the portal
would be open to all MDAs and potential digitisation outsourcing agents.
This program (2014/2015) applies to MDAs, including The births and Deaths Registry (BDR),
National Identification Authority (NIA), Registrar General's Department (RGD), Ghana Revenue
Authority (GRA), Judicial Service of Ghana (JSG), Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority
(DVLA), Ghana Health Service (GHS) and Ghana Immigration Service (GIS).
96https://blogs.worldbank.org/digital-development/big-steps-toward-ghana-s-digital-future

ICT Standards and Guidelines by NITA97
Set by NITA, the purpose of the ICT Standards and Guidelines is to ensure the provision of
quality ICT; promote efficiency standards, and ensure high quality of service. The standards also
aim to facilitate the coherence in the MDAs' ICT investments and activities and the
implementation and monitoring of the national ICT policy.
The standards are guided by the National Information Technology Agency Act 2008, Act 77.
Implementing these standards and guidelines will deepen regulatory compliance for a
successful digitisation agenda in Ghana. Also, when effectively implemented, NITA expects the
ICT Standards and Guidelines to help address issues of fair competition among industry
players, drive the growth of the country's Value Added Services (VAS) space, and ensure close
collaboration between stakeholders and NITA as a policy implementer.
Mapping ICT Skills in Ghana
NITA also commenced the certification of ICT professionals and IT firms in Ghana. The
certification of qualified IT professionals will help NITA know what IT specialists' skill levels are
available (2021).98
The Ghana Digital Acceleration Project (GDAP)99
The Ghana Digital Acceleration Project (GDAP) is being implemented by MoCD and approved
in March 2022. It aims to accelerate country-wide digital transformation while focusing on critical
digital enablers that promote the digital economy and build on existing digital foundations. The
project will also support complementary investments on the supply and demand sides of the
digital economy. Based on recommendations of previous assessments by the World Bank,
including the Ghana Digital Economy Diagnostic, the project will have activities that will support
a robust enabling environment for fast-tracked digitisation. Furthermore, GDAP will promote a
shift in digital government services from service to life-event focused to enhance the
government's digital capabilities. Furthermore, GDAP is expected to increase Ghana's capacity
to promote digital innovation and sector-wide transformation in selected strategic sectors. In
addition, the project is expected to boost digital skills development and the capability to increase
Ghana's digital talent base.
The objectives include:
● To expand access to broadband
● To enhance the efficiency and experience of selected digital public services
● To strengthen the digital innovation ecosystem
The project includes the following components:
● Component 1. Ensuring Inclusive and Safe Digital Transformation
● Component 2. Modernising Digital Government Services
97https://nita.gov.gh/guidelines/
98https://nita.gov.gh/
99Ghana Digital Acceleration Project (P176126), A World Bank Document

● Component 3. Digital Transformation of Strategic Sectors
● Component 4. Project Management and Implementation Support
● Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response
MoF and MOCD Compact for GhanaCares Programme100
This programme aims to accelerate ICT infrastructure and promote digital technologies for
economic and social transactions. It is owned by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and MoCD.
Priorities for the Communications and Digitisation Department
Prioritised under the Communication and Digitisation sector, under the GhanaCARES
programme, accelerated digitisation is to ensure catalytic investment and development of
communication infrastructure, integration and leveraging of data systems and platforms,
enhanced capacity of key institutions and improved coordination with the private sector for
improved service delivery, business expansion and economic transformation.
Specific interventions to fast-track digitisation for July 2020-December 2023:
i. Invest, consolidate, strengthen and expand the national fibre network backbone to
expand and improve internet connectivity
ii. Promote increased digital literacy
iii. Support Ghanaian technology entrepreneurs by building tech and innovation hubs and
also support the development and export of IT-enabled services such as business
process outsourcing (BPO) firms
iv. Expedite implementation of government’s digital initiatives (e.g. the National ID, digital
address systems, etc.)
Specific Commitments and Targets for 2021101:
The Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation intended to work closely with the private
sector to deliver the following agreed targets102.
1. Inventory of all Government digital assets and services developed
2. Institutional ICT utilisation, capability, capacity, competency, skills and digital readiness
enhanced
3. Public projects on Smart Workplace, National ID, Digital Address Systems, Land
Records Digitisation, Births and Death Registry, www.ghana.gov, Health Records
Digitisation, and virtual learning platforms expedited and consolidated
4. The regulatory capacity of the National Information technology Agency (NITA) and the
Legislative Instruments (LI) for the Electronic Transactions Act and the NITA Act
developed
5. Government of Ghana(GoG) fibre assets VRA, ECG, GRIDCO, Ghana Gas, BNC,
GIFEC consolidated
6. Common National Digital Architecture designed and implemented
7. Ghana Integrated Digital Transformation(GDIT) Implemented
100Compact for Post-Covid Transformation
101Compact for Post-Covid Transformation
102Full target details can be found under section 3 of the Final MOCD CARES COMPACT 2021 YA_DD
Document

8. Creation of Employment and Promoting Entrepreneurship

Gap Analysis of the Strategies and Policies of the Ghana Digital Economy
and Innovation Ecosystem
The table below highlights key gaps in the AI ecosystem and provides thoughts on key steps
that can lead to bridging the gaps. The gap analysis is drawn from Smart Africa and Digital
Impact Alliance study that sought to understand country progress, benchmarked against the
Digital Economy Blueprint for Africa. The study assesses ten countries in Africa that are
member states, including Ghana. The gap analysis is also drawn from The World Bank's Report
on Ghana's Digital Economy Diagnostic.
Digital Economy Gaps Identified Needs
Pillar
Digital
Government ● Significant progress in the governance ● Have clear roadmaps and visions that
of the digital economy despite identify relevant issues and paths to
weaknesses. addressing them.
● Trust in e-services offered by the ● Documentation for strategic planning, a
government is generally low, and many timeline for achieving objectives, and the
Ghanaians are unaware that these development of KPIs to support
e-services are available. monitoring and evaluation of progress
● The challenge of updating strategies towards a digital economy.
still exists, often requiring significant ● Synchronising ICT investments across
resources and time from the government requires innovative
governments. governance, funding, and interoperability
● Siloed investments and a lack of approaches to avoid siloed planning,
cooperation between ministries investment, and systems.
continue to exist, creating problems for
national and sectoral decision-making,
making it difficult to design and deploy
coordinated digital and ICT strategies
and plans.

Infrastructure ● Limited funding for digital projects is ● Adopting a centralised procurement,
still a challenge, as is acquiring deploying enterprise architecture
private-sector and sectoral frameworks for interoperable systems,
investments. harmonising IT systems and authorities,
● A struggle with improving and introducing cost-efficient measures
connectivity and digital literacy for IT resources across government.
because of affordability issues and ● Coordinated and centralised approaches
procurement challenges often create would need to be across the whole
negative downstream effects for ICT government and accompanied by
and digital access, challenging the supporting policies to provide for more
continued improvement of digital efficient and sustainable institutions,
government services. platforms, and governance.
● Most of the infrastructure put in place ● The need to devise innovative financing
by the government is concentrated in models that promote the efficient use of
the urban and commercial areas, existing resources on the one hand and
leaving a large section of the country's investment incentives for the private
rural areas without functional sector and other development partners
coverage. on the other.
● Issues in coordinating infrastructure ● Putting centralised procurement
investment and rollout, extending mechanisms and other processes that
connectivity to low-income and provide better value for the money and
marginalised populations, and encouraging public-private partnerships
creating incentives for private sector in developing ICT infrastructure and
infrastructure investments (mainly in reducing the cost of access.
rural areas). Internet cost remains on
the high side in the country with low
access, especially in rural areas.
● Providing reliable and fast broadband
connectivity for MDAs and MMDAs
across the country is also still
challenging.

Digital Platforms ● Lack of sectoral ICT strategies in ● Again, adopting a centralised framework
important areas like commerce and for interoperable systems, harmonisation
cross-cutting areas like gender and of digital systems and authorities, and
disability. introducing cost-efficient measures for
● The different MDAs often lead resources across government.
initiatives with parallel and ● Ensuring the sustainable rollout of ICT
overlapping activities; therefore, infrastructure requires governments to
there is a lack of coordination and secure funding, particularly for core
streamlining of programmes. digital platforms projects such as digital
● Platform diffusion is low - only 28% identity, which are catalysts for digital
of domestic firms have an online inclusion and connectivity, and create an
presence, and only 7.8% of people enabling policy and regulatory
perform online transactions. environment that incentivises different
● Despite strong moves toward stakeholders (e.g., private-sector and
electronic payment infrastructure, the other funders) to invest in the
country remains a cash-based development and maintenance of these
economy - 98% of payments are still projects.
being done in cash, and the main ● Emphasise public sector digital capacity
non-cash instrument continues to be building - building a strong team of
cheques - this may be a result of trust government ICT professionals who work
issues with using digital payment with other technical specialists will
platforms, low penetration of debit increase the effectiveness and efficiency
and credit cards and low availability of the existing digital government
of POS devices at merchant points. platforms and their further development.
● No business rules are in place to ● Establish a regulatory sandbox for Digital
govern pricing and other aspects of Commerce and Gig Economy labour
e-payment schemes, prompting many regulations - a regulatory sandbox will
providers to discourage their provide a safe place to test innovative
customers from sending money off-net approaches in collaboration with the
by increasing the fees for these private sector.
transactions. ● Develop a coordinated digital commerce
● With BoG mandating in May 2018 that support programme. The programme
all mobile money providers connect to should take advantage of ongoing local
GHLink, with full interoperability government efforts such as NYA and
between mobile money providers and NEIP, regional efforts like the Nairobi
banks introduced in December 2018, Manifesto on Digital Economy and
FinTechs are not yet connected to Inclusive Development in Africa
GHLink, with no clear rules around (UNCTAD, 2018) and private digital
participation in the scheme. platforms to increase the cross-border
market such as Jumia.

Digital Skills and ● Proactive steps have been taken to ● Improving citizens' digital skills and
Value address digital skills and talent values and local content creation
development gaps. However, there is necessitates working with the private
still a challenge in improving sector, civil society, and local creators to
connectivity and creating an improve access to education, particularly
enabling ecosystem, which affects for marginalised and low-income
the talent pipeline for the government communities; encourage digital literacy
and the private sector. and upskilling; promote a culture of
● Also, only a few Ghanaians below the innovation and entrepreneurship.
numbers required for a successful and ● Improve basic digital skills provision in
inclusive digital economy are said to the education system. To spur
possess the requisite digital skills improvement, policymakers must create
and experience beyond the basic use frameworks for public education
of a computer or tablet. institutions to leverage up-to-date digital
● The private sector is paying a skills training content.
premium for digital skills, making it ● Make computers and other ICT tools like
significantly difficult for the public mobile/smart devices equitably
sector to retain people with such accessible to all, especially for rural
skills. areas, by improving basic school
● The implementation of building a infrastructure needs.
workforce with strong digital skills - the ● Align intermediate digital skills taught
current National ICT in Education with future workforce needs - this should
Policy for Ghana(2015), continues to be aimed at both school-age and
face many challenges: the absence of pre-employment/postsecondary levels.
computer labs in schools, few or no Critical intermediate workforce skills in
computers in schools, lack of ICT most demand like digital marketing, data
teachers and unstable or no power analytics and professional software
supply. should be given much attention.
● Ghana is ranked 48th and 87th on ● The public sector should partner with the
quality of education and internet private sector to access significant
access in schools, respectively, in a resources for advanced digital skills to
Global Competitiveness Report done upgrade the provision and coverage of
for 2017- 2018. effective training.

Innovation Driven
Entrepreneurship ● Government's support for digital ● Develop a digital technology adoption
entrepreneurship is uncoordinated programme to accelerate the digital
and consists of multiple agencies transformation of the economy,
and programmes that provide especially SMEs. This can be made
overlapping support without a clear possible by joint efforts among the
overall vision. Government and IT sector to help
● Poor business environment nurture digital transformation in Ghana's
● Lack of access to credit and finance. public and private sectors.
● Mixed quality of entrepreneurial ● Provide incentives and platforms that
support. foster collaboration between research
institutions, universities and the private
sector through collaborative research
grants or centres of excellence for digital
solutions.
● Improve specific regulations for digital
industries:
● Creating tax policy, business
registration, and insolvency rules
that support startups and risk-taking
entrepreneurial businesses;
● Boost early-stage risk capital
financing and access to credit for
SMEs - restructure the VCTF to
ensure it operates as a trusted
intermediary in the VC ecosystem
by enforcing clear independence
governance;
● Encourage partial credit guarantees
and other risk-sharing mechanisms
to lower the cost of capital from
traditional financing institutions
(banks) to startups and SMEs.

Appendix 3 - Expert Contributors
Abdoulaye Diack Google AI, Ghana
Abdul-Rahman Ahmed KNUST, Responsible AI Lab (RAIL)
Abraham Kuuku Sam GIZ FAIR Forward
Afua Gyekyewaa Ghana Youth Employment Agency
Andrew Selasi Agbemenu KNUST, Responsible AI Lab (RAIL)
Professor Kwaku Appiah-Adu Senior Advisor To The Vice President of Ghana
Badrul Chowdhury Apple
Bridget Boakye Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, Ghana
Charlette N'Guessan Desiree BACE Group
Clement Osei Antwi Ministry Of Education
Daniel Essel Ministry Of Transport
Darlington Akogo Minohealth, KaraAgro AI
David Ofori Accra Digital Centre
Deborah Kanubala WiMLDS Accra, Phd Student Universitat des Saarlandes
Derrydean Dadzie Heritors Labs
Doris Ampadu-Ameyaw Registrar General’s Department
Dr Anthony Adofo Ofosu Deputy Director General, Ghana Health Service
Dr Patrick Adonoo Data Protection Commision
Emmanuel Mumuni GIZ FAIR Forward
Erasmus Akosah Office Of The Registrar Of Companies
Fatima Tambajang NVIDIA
Foster Awintiti Akugri Hacklab Foundation
Frederick Yeboah Kofi Annan Centre Of Excellence (AITI-KACE)
G. Ayorkar Korsah Ashesi University
Haruna Musah Kofi Annan Centre Of Excellence (AITI-KACE)

Henry Nunoo-Mensah KNUST, Responsible AI Lab (RAIL)
Ing. Chris Anaglo Ministry Of Energy
Isaac Coffie Asaak
Ivy Barley Microsoft, Developers In Vogue
Jeph Acheampong Blossom Academy
John Avor Volta River Authority
Johnnie Allotey Mpharma
Kenneth Edem Ashigbey Ghana Chamber Of Telecommunications
Kofi Yeboah Mozilla Foundation
Kwame Fianko Ghana Revenue Authority
Kwame Oppong Bank Of Ghana
Lawrence Annor Otu-Nyarko Data Protection Commission
Mary Afram GIZ FAIR Forward
Matthew Darkwa Amalitech
Maxwell Ababio Data Protection Commission
Maxwell Adu-Nsafoa Lands Commission
Nancy Arhinfuwaa Imadi Bank Of Ghana
Natasha Hammond Data Protection Commision
Nathan Nakai Nettey Ghana Revenue Authority
Nathaniel A. Wilson Ministry Of Transport
Nathaniel Amonoo Wilson Ministry Of Transport
Nicolas Miailhe The Future Society
Nii Osae Osae Dade Mazzuma, CYST, Artificial Intelligence Association Of Ghana
Ministry of Environment, Science Technology and Innovation
Oliver Boachie
(MESTI)
Patricia Adusei-Poku Data Protection Commission
Prof. Jerry John Kponyo KNUST, Responsible AI Lab (RAIL)
Richard Okyere-Fosu National Information Technology Agency (NITA)

Robert Okine Bewsys
Salami Suleiman Amalitech
Salomey Osei Ghana NLP, WiMLDS Accra, University of Deusto
Sampson Kofi Adotey African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS)
Stephen Nyarko Djaba National Information Technology Agency (NITA)
Dr Stephen Moore University Of Cape Coast and Ghana NLP
Winifred Addo-Cobbiah Ghana Health Service
Yolanda Lannquist The Future Society