STAATSKOERANT,10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 3
G n • a K
eneral otices lGemene ennisGewinGs
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES
NOTICE 3880 OF 2026
DRAFT SOUTH AFRICA NATIONAL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
POLICY
The Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies, hereby publishes, in
accordance with section 85 (2) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
1996, the Draft South Africa National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Policy that was approved
by Cabinet on 25 March 2026 (combined with the Special Sitting of Cabinet on 01 April
2026), for public comment.
Members of the public and interested persons are invited to submit their comments /
inputs / written representations on this Draft Policy, within sixty (60) days of the date of
publication of this notice, final day being 10 June 2026, 16h00 at the latest. Late
submissions may not be considered.
All written comments and enquiries on this publication should be directed to:
The Director-General, Department of Communications and Digital Technologies
Attention: Mr M. Mashologu (Deputy Director-General: Digital Society and Economy)
Block A, iParioli Office Park, 1166 Park Street, Hatfield, Pretoria
Private Bag X860, Pretoria, 0001
By email: aipolicy@dcdt.gov.za
All contributors are requested to mark clearly "Draft South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence (AI) Policy" in the subject field of their correspondence.
An interested person making a written submission is deemed to have consented to its
disclosure to a requester, except if otherwise clearly requested by such interested
person based on one of the grounds for refusal of access to records as provided in the
Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No. 2 of 2000).
A copy of the Draft Policy is available at www.dcdt.gov.za and www.gov.za
_________________________
MR SOLLY MALATSI, MP
MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES
DATE: 09 April 2026
Page 1 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

4 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
Explanatory Note
Setting a policy agenda for AI is inherently complex, as the technology has an immense
range of applications. Because of the broad range of applications and applicability in
almost every conceivable sector, a general national policy cannot, and should not,
address every aspect of AI. Rather, a national policy’s primary objective is to identify the
core principles that guide sectoral approaches.
Considering the rapid development of AI technologies and the mainstream adoption of
such technologies, traditional regulatory or policy development approaches are unlikely
to adequately address the challenges and leverage the opportunities associated with AI.
Included in this approach is the use of open-ended language in the Draft National AI
Policy, which creates the opportunity for engagement towards the finalisation of the final
policy document.
The Draft National AI Policy is based on the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework of August 2024, the 32 submissions received on this Framework, and
consultations with government structures through the Cabinet Cluster process.
As such, the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies acknowledges
that the Draft National AI Policy is a work-in-progress, and that the national government’s
final approach to the AI Policy agenda will require extensive external consultations with
both local and international experts and interest groups. The Draft National AI Policy
should thus be seen as a point of departure and indication of government’s current
thinking, rather than a strict indication of South Africa’s final approach to the AI policy
landscape.
There are various interventions that have wording that is purposefully open-ended (such
as “establish guidelines/standards”). This approach is implemented in the Draft National
AI Policy due to the acknowledgement of the importance of engaging with industry and
subject-matter experts to find appropriate definitions.
Exactly because of the broad nature of AI technologies, it is important to note that the
implementation of the interventions proposed by the Draft National AI Policy fall under
the mandates of various government departments and entities. The successful
implementation of the policy will thus require a whole-of-government approach.
The National AI Policy will establish the national priorities and norms, but a key aspect
of the Policy is the recognition of sector-specific dynamics that require specialised
approaches.
Sector-specific working groups will be established to develop implementation roadmaps
aligned to each Cluster’s sectors, including manufacturing, energy, infrastructure,
transport and trade, and other such sectors where the need for specific responses are
identified. These would serve in developing sector strategies and guidelines for the
implementation of appropriate and specific AI.
Accordingly, DCDT envisions a staged implementation approach, to enable government
to respond to the most pressing regulatory needs immediately, while simultaneously cocreating a comprehensive policy approach that is future-proof and technology-neutral:
Page 2 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 5
1. Year 1 (2025/26):
a. Finalisation of the National AI Policy
b. Identification and publication of key draft regulatory requirements
necessary to address unacceptable risks
c. Initiate development of National AI Policy Guidelines
2. Year 2 (2026/27):
a. Publish National AI Policy Guidelines
b. Implement key regulatory requirements for high-risk use cases
c. Identify and publish draft regulatory requirements for medium and low
risk AI use cases
d. Develop and adopt sectoral AI strategies
e. Commence institutional framework design and funding approach, and
secure funding.
3. Year 3 (2027/28)
a. Full implementation of outstanding policy interventions, which may
need to be updated to match emerging trends in AI technologies.
Page 3 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

6 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
DRAFT SOUTH AFRICA NATIONAL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
POLICY
(March 2026)
Foreword
The rapid evolution of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology presents both
unprecedented opportunities and unique challenges for South Africa. This National
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Policy document reflects our nation’s unwavering
commitment to harnessing AI's transformative power while addressing the specific
needs of our society.
Building on the foundational principles laid out in the initial national AI policy
framework, this document introduces expanded strategic pillars, and strategic building
blocks leveraging on sector-specific applications that place greater emphasis on
inclusive growth, capacity development, and safeguarding human rights. These
measures are rooted in the fundamental role played by the Nation’s Constitution, as
well as the Bill of Rights therein.
The additional measures ensure that South Africa not only keeps pace with global
advancements but also carves out a leadership role in AI adoption across the African
continent.
A key enhancement to this policy is the deeper focus on the ethical governance of AI
systems. Important provisions address fairness, bias mitigation, and data sovereignty,
recognizing South Africa’s socio-political landscape and the imperative to redress
historical inequalities.
The document extends the initial AI policy framework by embedding principles of
intergenerational equity, ensuring that AI-driven innovation prioritizes the well-being of
current and future generations.
The development of AI ombudsperson structures and the establishment of an AI Ethics
Board underscore the importance of transparency, accountability, and human-centric
AI deployment.
Page 4 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 7
The expanded scope of this policy also introduces targeted interventions for capacity
building and digital infrastructure enhancement. It outlines comprehensive educational
initiatives to integrate AI into primary, secondary, and tertiary education, fostering a
robust pipeline of talent to fuel innovation.
Additionally, the document highlights the creation of AI hubs and supercomputing
facilities aimed at empowering local startups and small enterprises. These initiatives
reflect a strategic shift toward democratizing access to AI technologies, ensuring that
economic benefits are widely distributed across sectors and communities.
As we move forward, this updated document signals a bold step toward fostering a
sustainable and inclusive AI ecosystem. By aligning AI advancements with South
Africa’s Constitution and socio-economic goals, the policy paves the way for a resilient
digital economy that prioritizes equity, innovation, and national competitiveness.
We extend our gratitude to all stakeholders whose insights have shaped this
comprehensive policy. Together, we are laying the foundation for a future where AI
serves as a catalyst for national economic development and social upliftment.
______________________
OMEGA SHELEMBE
ACTING DIRECTOR-GENERAL
DATE: 2026-04-09
Page 5 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

8 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
1. Introduction and Background
1.1 Policy Issue Identification
The advent of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is transforming economies and societies across
the globe. As a strategic general-purpose technology, AI holds the potential to drive
innovation, enhance productivity, and contribute meaningfully to socio-economic
development. However, in the absence of a coherent national policy and coordinated
strategies, South Africa risks falling behind in leveraging AI to address its
developmental challenges and improve the well-being of its citizens. A lack of an
integrated, inclusive, and contextually relevant national AI policy has the potential to
exacerbate digital divides, deepen inequality, and limit the nation’s ability to safeguard
rights, values, and sovereignty, as well as to support the emergence of startups in a
rapidly evolving global AI ecosystem.
1.2 Background to the Policy Issue
South Africa’s journey toward developing a national AI policy is both an opportunity
and a challenge, shaped by the dynamic interplay of technological, economic, and
societal forces. The rapid advancement of AI technologies globally and their
transformative potential create an urgent need for South Africa to harness these
innovations to remain competitive and relevant. AI offers vast opportunities for
economic growth, innovation, and job creation, addressing critical social demands
across healthcare, education, agriculture, and public safety. However, the pressure to
harmonize with international standards and frameworks for ethical AI development and
deployment underscores the necessity for robust and adaptive policymaking.
Despite these promising prospects, South Africa faces significant historical and
structural barriers that complicate AI adoption. The persistent digital divide, the
entrenched socio-economic inequities, the high rates of unemployment, and
institutional inertia all represent substantial weights of the past that often resist change.
Unequal access to technology, education, and infrastructure poses challenges to
achieving equitable AI adoption and ensuring that its benefits are widely shared. In
addition, outdated regulatory frameworks would struggle to keep pace with the rapid
evolution of AI technologies, highlighting the urgent need for legal and institutional
reforms to create an environment conducive to innovation and inclusion.
Page 6 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 9
Crafting an effective AI policy for South Africa demands a delicate balance between
addressing current technological imperatives, overcoming historical constraints, and
striving toward a future vision of equity and sustainability. Policy interventions must
bridge the gap between the push of technological advancement and the pull of
economic transformation while addressing systemic inequalities. Investments in
education, infrastructure, and inclusive governance frameworks will be critical to
ensuring that AI not only drives economic growth but also contributes to social equity,
sustainable development, and global leadership in ethical AI practices.
1.3 Policy Context and Environment, Links to Other Policies
The policy is situated within a broader legislative and strategic ecosystem. It forms part
of a national legislative and regulatory architecture which includes, among others: the
Constitution, intellectual property, copyright, performers’ rights and artists’ rights
including the Copyright Act of 1978, Copyright Amendment Bill and Performers'
Protection Amendment Bill, Intellectual Property Rights Act 2008, Protection of
Personal Information Act (POPIA 2013), the Electronic Communications Act of 2005,
Electronic Communications and Transactions Act of 2002, Films and Publications Act
of 1996, and Patents Act of 1978.
Other regulation and legislation which would be relevant includes the Cybercrimes Act
of 2020, Technology Innovation Act of 2008, Promotion of Access to Information Act
of 2000 (PAIA), National Cybersecurity Policy Framework (NCPF), the National Policy
on Data and Cloud, National Integrated ICT Policy, NICIS Framework of 2014, Critical
Infrastructure Protection Act or 2019, the South African Human Rights Commission
Act 2013 and the like.
All these are in support of the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic, as well as
the accompanying Bill of Rights. As a result, AI must not be used to violate any s9,
s10, s12, s14, s15, s16, s17, s18, s19, s21, s22, s23, s24, s27, s28, s29, s30, s31,
s32, s33, s35 rights. Instead, AI may be used to advance all these, as well as s11,
s13, s20, s25, s26, s34 and any other rights.
Page 7 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

10 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
It also interfaces with continental and international frameworks such as the African
Union (AU) Digital Transformation Strategy, Continental AI Strategy, African Digital
Compact, Data Policy Framework, among others. It also considers the Smart Africa AI
Blueprint, OECD AI Principles, and UNESCO’s Recommendation on the Ethics of AI,
among others. The policy contributes to the realization of national initiatives, including
the National Development Plan 2030, Digital Economy Masterplan, and the
Presidential Commission on the Fourth Industrial Revolution (PC4IR) Report.
1.4 Brief Overview of the Policy Process Followed
The development of the policy followed a phased, consultative, and evidence-based
process, in line with South Africa’s National Policy Development Framework of 2020.
This included desktop research and benchmarking against international best
practices, the identification of policy gaps and opportunities, and the integration of
insights from the PC4IR Report. A multi-stakeholder engagement approach was
adopted, involving consultations with academia, industry, civil society, grassroots
movements, and various government departments. The policy drafting was further
informed by a key working group which examined AI’s implications across sectors,
including health, education, finance, agriculture, and public safety. The outcomes of
these engagements shaped the policy vision, objectives, and implementation priorities
presented in the document.
1.5 Key Concepts
1.5.1 Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a multidisciplinary field that integrates principles from
computer science, engineering, philosophy, psychology, mathematics, neuroscience,
linguistics, and biology.1 Its primary goal is to develop intelligent agents capable of
learning, modelling data, making predictions, and either autonomously making
decisions or assisting humans in decision-making. While AI systems are inspired by
human intelligence, they do not replicate it directly. Instead, AI aims to create
machines that demonstrate reasoning, perception, learning, and adaptability in various
1 Arias, C.R. (2022). An Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. SPU Works. 173.
https://digitalcommons.spu.edu/works/173
Page 8 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 11
contexts.2 AI is fundamentally software-based and algorithm-driven, though it extends
to physical entities such as robotics3 and autonomous weapons.
AI can be defined as the combination of artificial (indicating non-natural) and
intelligence (the ability to reason, perceive, learn, and generate insights).4 It
encompasses activities such as speech recognition, problem-solving, planning, and
adaptation to different environments.5 Advances in Big Data, computing power, and
deep learning algorithms have significantly accelerated AI's capabilities, enabling it to
process vast datasets more efficiently than humans.6 AI technologies are transforming
entire industries by optimizing resource use, enhancing productivity, and improving
data-driven decision-making.7
1.5.2 Machine Learning
Machine Learning (ML) is often considered a subset of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that
enhances computational capabilities by enabling systems to learn from data and
develop analytical models without relying solely on explicit programming.8 Unlike
traditional programming, which follows predefined rules, ML algorithms identify
patterns and relationships from observed examples, allowing systems to improve
performance over time. This ability has led to the development of intelligent systems
2 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2020). Artificial Intelligence: How can we ensure
that AI benefits society as a whole? https://www.oecd.org/digital/artificial-intelligence/
3 El Hadi, M. M. (2023). Artificial Intelligence Background, Definitions, Challenges and Benefits.
https://jstc.journals.ekb.eg/article_297957_18c63823bf45bdd85ffd54bf0dafa8f5.pdf
4 El Hadi, M. M. (2023). Artificial Intelligence Background, Definitions, Challenges and Benefits.
https://jstc.journals.ekb.eg/article_297957_18c63823bf45bdd85ffd54bf0dafa8f5.pdf
5 El Hadi, M. M. (2023). Artificial Intelligence Background, Definitions, Challenges and Benefits.
https://jstc.journals.ekb.eg/article_297957_18c63823bf45bdd85ffd54bf0dafa8f5.pdf
6 Arias, C.R. (2022). An Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. SPU Works. 173.
https://digitalcommons.spu.edu/works/173
7Mohammad, S.M. (2020). Artificial Intelligence in Information Technology. International Journal of Innovations in
Engineering Research And Technology [IJIERT]. ISSN: 2394-3696. Vol 7(6). 2020.
8 Jayanth, A. B., Harish, R. D. S., & Binoy, N. (2017). Machine Learning Approaches to Electricity Consumption
Forecasting in Automated Metering Infrastructure (AMI) Systems: An Empirical Study. 254-263. 10.1007/978-3319-57264-2_26.
Page 9 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

12 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
that can support decision-making and optimize interactions across various sectors,
including healthcare, finance, and digital markets.9
Machine Learning employs different learning paradigms, including supervised,
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning, each designed for specific tasks.10
Supervised learning, used in classification and regression, trains models on labelled
datasets to make accurate predictions.11 Unsupervised learning identifies hidden
patterns in unlabeled data, enabling techniques like clustering and dimensionality
reduction.12 Reinforcement learning, inspired by trial-and-error learning, allows
systems to interact with dynamic environments and refine their actions.13 Harnessing
ML allows extraction of valuable insights from vast datasets, enhance decision-making
processes, and drive innovation in AI-driven technologies, leading to improved
efficiency and transformative advancements across industries.14
1.5.3 Deep Learning
Deep Learning (DL) is a specialized branch of machine learning that leverages multilayered artificial neural networks (ANNs) to automatically extract meaningful patterns
and representations from raw data.15 Unlike traditional machine learning techniques,
which often require manual feature engineering, deep learning models learn
9 Shrestha, P. (2021). Application of Machine Learning and Deep Learning Techniques for Nepal Stock Market
Price Prediction. 10.13140/RG.2.2.11794.38085.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353634645_Application_of_Machine_Learning_and_Deep_Learning_T
echniques_for_Nepal_stock_market_price_prediction/citation/download
10 LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature 521, pp 436–444.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
11 Madani, A., Arnaout, R., Mofrad, M. et al. (2018). Fast and Accurate View Classification of Echocardiograms
Using Deep Learning. Digital Med 1(6). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-017-0013-1
12 Madani, A., Arnaout, R., Mofrad, M. et al. (2018). Fast and Accurate View Classification of Echocardiograms
Using Deep Learning. Digital Med 1(6). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-017-0013-1
13 Janiesch, C., Zschech, P., & Heinrich, K. (2021). Machine Learning and Deep Learning. Electronic Markets.
31. 10.1007/s12525-021-00475-2.
14 Acemoglu, D. & Restrepo, R. (2018). Artificial Intelligence, Automation and Work. National Bureau of
Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w24196/w24196.pdf
15 Goodfellow, I., Yoshua, B., & Aaron, C. (2017). Machine Learning Basics.
https://www.deeplearningbook.org/contents/ml.html
Page 10 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 13
hierarchical representations of data through layers of interconnected neurons, allowing
them to process complex, high-dimensional inputs such as images, text, and speech.16
While deep learning outperforms conventional methods in tasks involving large
datasets, other models like decision trees may still be preferable in cases where data
is limited, or interpretability is crucial.17 Nevertheless, advancements such as crossmodal learning have expanded deep learning’s versatility, enabling it to process
multiple data formats simultaneously, which is particularly valuable in fields like ecommerce and healthcare.18
The power of deep learning lies in its ability to automate feature extraction, reducing
reliance on manual input and effectively handling unstructured and noisy data.19
Through a hierarchical learning process, complex features are built from simpler ones,
enhancing model accuracy and adaptability.20 Various architectures, including
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for image processing, Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) for sequential data, and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
for synthetic data generation, have been developed to tackle specific challenges
across industries.21 Integrating deep learning into AI-driven applications can unlock
valuable insights from vast datasets, improving decision-making and fostering
innovation in areas such as autonomous systems and natural language processing.22
16 LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature 521, pp 436–444.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
17 Zhang, L., Wang, S. & Liu, B. (2018). Deep Learning for Sentiment Analysis: A Survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. 8. 10.1002/widm.1253.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322694910_Deep_Learning_for_Sentiment_Analysis_A_Survey
18 Zhang, L., Wang, S. & Liu, B. (2018). Deep Learning for Sentiment Analysis: A Survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. 8. 10.1002/widm.1253.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322694910_Deep_Learning_for_Sentiment_Analysis_A_Survey
19 Brynjolfsson, E. & McAfee, A. (2017). The Business of Artificial Intelligence. https://hbr.org/2017/07/thebusiness-of-artificial-intelligence
20 Goodfellow, I., Yoshua, B., & Aaron, C. (2017). Machine Learning Basics.
https://www.deeplearningbook.org/contents/ml.html
21 Leijnen, S. & van Veen, F. (2020). The Neural Network Zoo. Proceedings 2020, 47(1),
9; https://doi.org/10.3390/proceedings2020047009
22 Goodfellow, I., Yoshua, B., & Aaron, C. (2017). Machine Learning Basics.
https://www.deeplearningbook.org/contents/ml.html
Page 11 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

14 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
2. Problem Statement
2.1 Underlying Policy Statement
South Africa stands at a critical juncture where embracing AI offers both profound
opportunities and complex challenges. The underlying policy imperative is to develop
a comprehensive, inclusive, and ethically grounded national AI policy that ensures
responsible innovation, protects public interest, and advances social and economic
transformation. This requires deliberate action to bridge the digital divide, address
systemic inequalities, modernize regulatory frameworks, and build capacity for AI
deployment across sectors. The policy seeks to enable safe and secure adoption of
AI technologies, while safeguarding rights and aligning with national values and
international norms
2.2 Nature, History, and Scope of the Problem (including Trend
Identification and Assessment)
Globally, AI has emerged as a general-purpose technology that is reshaping economic
systems, labour markets, and governance structures. For South Africa, AI presents
transformative potential to drive economic growth, improve public service delivery, and
respond to national development priorities. However, the country's historical socioeconomic disparities, digital inequities, and outdated institutional arrangements pose
significant barriers to equitable AI adoption. The persistent digital divide, especially in
underserved and rural communities, limits access to the infrastructure, skills, and
opportunities needed to benefit from AI. Many South Africans remain excluded from
digital services due to a lack of connectivity, affordability challenges, or inadequate
digital literacy. Moreover, entrenched socio-economic inequality - stemming from
apartheid-era structural injustices - continues to affect access to education,
employment, and participation in the innovation economy.
Institutions tasked with regulatory oversight often struggle to keep pace with the rapid
evolution of AI technologies. South Africa lacks dedicated legislative frameworks and
institutional capacity tailored for AI-specific risks such as algorithmic bias,
accountability in autonomous decision-making, and data protection in large-scale
analytics systems. In addition, there is growing pressure to align with emerging global
Page 12 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 15
standards and ethical principles for AI governance. International trends reflect a shift
toward risk-based, values-driven AI regulation - seen in the European Union’s AI Act,
OECD recommendations, and UNESCO's ethical AI frameworks. South Africa must
respond to these developments while ensuring its AI policy reflects local socioeconomic and socio-political realities, as well as developmental imperatives.
The challenge is thus multifaceted: to stimulate innovation and competitiveness,
ensure fairness and inclusion, and anticipate risks; technological, ethical, economic,
and societal. Bridging the gap between the "push" of current technological imperatives
and the "pull" of future social aspirations, while addressing the "weight" of historical
disadvantage, is central to the policy’s design.
Page 13 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

16 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
3. Proposed Policy Vision
3.1 Proposed National Vision emanating from the South Africa AI
Policy
“AI for inclusive economic growth, job creation, cost reduction, and a developing
Africa.”
In line with the mission of the State, this vision reflects South Africa’s aspiration to
harness AI to catalyse socio-economic transformation, drive innovation, and contribute
to a more inclusive, sustainable, and competitive national and continental future.
3.2 Critical Sectors for AI Implementation
AI in South Africa will play a key role in the critical areas of:
a. Education
b. Healthcare
c. And Agriculture
d. (With Public Administration implementation as a key lever or tool).
In all these sectors, the deployment of AI relies on robust digital infrastructure and
widespread connectivity.
3.3 The Rationale for a Policy Intervention
The development of this policy is a strategic imperative to guide the responsible and
ethical development, deployment, and utilization of AI across all sectors of society. As
AI technologies rapidly advance, they offer unprecedented opportunities for economic
growth, improved public services, and enhanced quality of life. However, without a
coherent and comprehensive policy position, these benefits could be overshadowed
by potential risks such as job displacement, privacy concerns, and even national
security risks.
The policy provides clear guidelines and a structured approach to harnessing AI’s
potential that enables adoption whilst ensuring safety, ethical use, and alignment with
public interest in a risk-proportionate manner – in alignment with South Africa’s socioeconomic goals and values. It provides mechanisms for the establishment of a
framework to regulate the development, deployment, and use of AI in a trustworthy
Page 14 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 17
and ethical manner - and in a manner that supports responsible innovation and growth,
in harmony with a cross-border enablement system.
A key rationale for establishing this policy is to foster sectoral strategies that address
specific needs and opportunities within different industries, such as healthcare,
education, security, finance, etc. By laying down an overarching policy position, the
national AI policy enables the development of tailored strategies that leverage AI to
drive innovation and efficiency in each sector. This approach ensures that the unique
challenges and opportunities of each industry are considered, leading to more
effective and targeted implementation of AI technologies. Additionally, sectoral
strategies derived from this policy will facilitate a more coordinated and cohesive effort
across various governmental and private entities, promoting collaboration and
knowledge sharing.
The policy serves as the foundational basis for creating AI regulations and potentially
future AI legislation in South Africa. As regulators work to establish rules and standards
for AI, it is crucial that these regulations are grounded in a well-defined policy position
that reflects the country’s vision and priorities for AI. By providing a clear yet flexible
stance, this policy guides the development of tailored regulatory mechanisms that
ensure AI applications are safe, responsible, ethical, and aligned with public interest.
This will not only protect citizens from potential harms but also build trust in AI
technologies, encouraging their adoption and fostering a thriving AI ecosystem in
South Africa.
3.4 Theory of Change for Framing the National AI Policy: A Futures
Triangle Approach to Shaping South Africa's AI Landscape
The Futures Triangle23 approach serves as a crucial framework for framing the
national AI policy, enabling the development of a comprehensive framework that
addresses the multifaceted challenges and opportunities shaping South Africa's AI
landscape.
23 Inayatullah, S. (2008). The Futures Triangle: Tracing the outline of the future. Journal of Futures
Studies, 13(2), 1-10.
Page 15 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

18 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
By integrating the "Push of the Present," "Pull of the Future," and "Weight of the Past,"
this approach allows the policymaking effort to holistically analyse the driving forces,
aspirations, and historical constraints shaping the development and implementation of
AI and related policy in South Africa.
Figure 1: Futures Triangle
3.4.1 Push of the Present
These are the quantitative factors and patterns shaping the future.
• Technological Advancement: AI technologies are advancing rapidly
worldwide, necessitating South Africa to adopt these innovations to stay
competitive and relevant. The nation must keep pace with global
advancements to avoid falling behind in technological capabilities. In this
respect, it becomes crucial to address the current gaps in data quality,
availability, and readiness for AI.
• Economic Necessity: AI offers significant potential for economic growth by
enhancing productivity, creating new industries, and fostering innovation.
Embracing AI can drive South Africa’s economic development, unleash the
Page 16 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 19
country’s entrepreneurial energy, create job opportunities, and improve
overall economic resilience.
• Social Demands: There is an increasing demand for AI-driven solutions in
critical sectors of the economy (healthcare, agriculture, education, and
public safety, etc.). AI can provide innovative solutions to social challenges,
improving service delivery and enhancing quality of life.
• Policy Momentum: Global trends in AI governance and the need to
harmonize with international standards are pushing South Africa to develop
its own AI policies. The country needs to align with international norms and
standards to ensure harmonized, ethical, and effective AI development and
deployment.
3.4.2 Pull of the Future
This refers to the captivating visions of the future that are so irresistible that one cannot
resist focusing on them. The National Development Plan (NDP) was aimed to envision
South Africa’s future where poverty, unemployment and inequality are overcome.
• Economic Transformation: The vision is to use AI to transform South
Africa's economy, create new industries, reduce unemployment, and foster
innovation. This involves creating a dynamic and competitive economic
environment that can adapt to global changes and leverage AI for
sustainable growth.
• Social Equity: Ensuring that AI contributes to social equity by addressing
disparities and improving access to services is a key goal. AI can help bridge
gaps in areas like healthcare, agriculture, education, and economic
opportunities, promoting inclusiveness and reducing inequalities.
• Sustainable Development: AI can drive sustainable practices in
agriculture, energy management, and urban planning. Utilizing AI for
sustainability aligns with global environmental goals and helps South Africa
Page 17 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

20 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
address its environmental challenges, as well as strive towards key
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
• Global Leadership: South Africa aims to be a leader in AI within the African
continent and a significant player on the global stage. This involves not only
technological advancements but also influencing global AI ethics and
governance frameworks.
3.4.3 Weight of the Past
This refers to the obstacles and entrenched structures that are impeding our progress
and resisting change. South Africa has shown unsatisfactory progress in dealing with
its historical challenges.
• Digital Divide: The persistent digital divide, characterized by unequal
access to technology and education, poses a significant challenge. Bridging
this divide is crucial for ensuring equitable AI adoption and benefits.
• Historical Inequities: Socio-economic disparities rooted in historical
injustices could slow the adoption of AI technologies. Addressing these
disparities requires inclusive policies that ensure broad access to AI
benefits.
• Institutional Inertia: Resistance to change within established institutions
and bureaucratic inertia could impede the rapid adoption of new
technologies. Overcoming this inertia requires strong leadership and clear
policy direction.
• Regulatory Frameworks: Existing regulatory and legislative frameworks
may not be equipped to handle the rapid pace of technological change.
Updating and reforming these frameworks are essential to create a
conducive environment for AI development.
Page 18 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 21
3.4.4 Analysis of the Interactions
3.4.4.1Push-Pull Dynamics
The strong push from technological and economic imperatives, combined with the
aspirational pull of economic transformation and social equity, suggests a powerful
momentum towards adopting a comprehensive AI policy. However, balancing
immediate technological advancements with long-term social goals will be crucial. The
push factors drive the urgent need for policy development, while the pull factors guide
the policy towards sustainable and inclusive goals.
3.4.4.2 Push-Weight Tension
Current technological and economic pressures may conflict with the weight of historical
issues such as the digital divide and socio-economic inequalities. Addressing these
historical weights requires deliberate policy interventions that ensure inclusive access
to AI benefits. Investments in fundamental digital infrastructure are necessary to bridge
the digital divide and enable widespread AI adoption.
3.4.4.3 Pull-Weight Interaction
The aspirational pull towards social equity and sustainable development must contend
with historical and institutional barriers. Strategies to overcome these barriers include
targeted investments in education, infrastructure, and regulatory reforms to foster an
enabling environment for AI. Policy must be designed to ensure that AI initiatives are
inclusive and equitable, addressing historical disparities and promoting broad access
to AI benefits.
Page 19 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

22 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
4. Core Policy Objectives
Developing a robust and forward-looking AI policy is essential for South Africa to
harness the transformative potential of AI amid the rapid global evolution of this
technology. AI presents a unique opportunity to drive economic growth, enhance
service delivery, and position South Africa as an innovation leader. The Fourth
Industrial Revolution (4IR) is characterized by the fusion of technologies blurring the
lines between the physical, digital, and biological spheres. At the core of 4IR is Artificial
Intelligence (AI), which is projected to contribute approximately USD $19.9 trillion to
the global economy by 2030.
By fostering advancements in key sectors such as healthcare, agriculture, education,
industry and public safety, AI can become a powerful tool for addressing societal
challenges and unlocking new avenues for development. A comprehensive policy will
enable South Africa to align with global trends, capitalize on emerging opportunities,
and establish itself as a key player in the global AI ecosystem.
However, South Africa faces significant obstacles that must be addressed to ensure
the inclusive adoption of AI. Historical inequalities, persistent digital divides, and
outdated regulatory frameworks pose substantial barriers to creating an environment
conducive to innovation and widespread AI deployment. Addressing these challenges
requires a multifaceted approach, including deliberate efforts to bridge the
technological and socio-economic gaps that hinder progress. A policy-driven focus on
fostering digital literacy, expanding internet access, and creating a supportive
ecosystem for technological innovation is critical for unlocking the transformative
potential of AI in South Africa.
A central pillar of the national AI policy is the concept of intergenerational equity,
which underscores the importance of ensuring that AI development serves the needs
and rights of both current and future generations. This involves embedding
sustainability and ethical foresight into AI strategies to create long-term value for
society while mitigating risks. By prioritizing responsible AI practices, South Africa can
ensure that technological advancements promote inclusivity, protect human rights,
and support Sustainable Development Goals. This ethical approach to AI policy
Page 20 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 23
development positions the nation to address both immediate challenges and long-term
aspirations effectively.
To achieve these objectives, South Africa must enact regulatory reforms and prioritize
investments in strategic areas such as education, digital infrastructure, and research
and development. Strengthening foundational capabilities will not only bridge the
digital divide but also foster a skilled workforce capable of driving AI innovation.
Furthermore, harmonizing and aligning the policy with international AI governance
standards will enhance the country’s global competitiveness while addressing
domestic socio-economic disparities. By taking a holistic and inclusive approach,
South Africa can leverage AI as a catalyst for economic transformation, social equity,
and sustainable growth, ensuring that the benefits of AI are shared widely across all
sectors of society.
The guidelines espoused in this policy must be followed. And in line with the OECD’s
human-centred values: “AI actors should respect the rule of law, human rights,
democratic and human-centred values throughout the AI system lifecycle. These
include non-discrimination and equality, freedom, dignity, autonomy of individuals,
privacy and data protection, diversity, fairness, social justice, and internationally
recognised labour rights. This also includes addressing misinformation and
disinformation amplified by AI, while respecting freedom of expression and other rights
and freedoms protected by applicable international law. To this end, AI actors should
implement mechanisms and safeguards, such as capacity for human agency and
oversight, including to address risks arising from uses outside of intended purpose,
intentional misuse, or unintentional misuse in a manner appropriate to the context and
consistent with the state of the art.”24
This policy seeks to ensure the responsible integration of AI into both public and
private sector business models to unlock hidden opportunities to drive economic
growth, explore ways to enhance societal well-being, and through talent and capacity
development, position Africa as a leading continent in AI innovation. To achieve these
24 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (n.d.). Human centred values
and principles for artificial intelligence. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org
Page 21 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

24 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
goals, South Africa will need to introduce appropriate regulatory reforms, targeted
investments in skills development, digital infrastructure development, and nurture local
innovation and startup ecosystems.
4.1 Expected Outcomes of This Policy
This policy is designed to lead to:
a. Increased uptake of AI technologies in public, private, society, and other
sectors.
b. Enhanced institutional capacity for AI governance and regulation.
c. Growth in local AI innovation ecosystems and job creation.
d. Reduction in the digital divide through equitable access to AI education,
technologies, and services.
e. Stronger national positioning in global AI discussions and partnerships.
4.2 Objectives of the Policy
The policy outlines the following six (06) objectives to address identified challenges:
a. Strengthen AI-related education, research, and skills training through STEAMfocused curricula, public education campaigns, and AI community centres.
b. Use AI in public service delivery, data- driven asset distribution, and startup
support through sandboxes and accelerators, as well as for industrial
innovativeness and startup development.
c. Establish an AI Ethics Board, National AI Commission / Office, and AI
Regulatory Authority (while configuring a harmonized regulatory environment
with existing authorities) to oversee and guide AI development, implementation,
and compliance.
d. Develop localized ethical standards aligned with international norms, promote
fairness, transparency, accountability, and inclusiveness across the AI lifecycle.
e. Use AI tools to digitize and preserve indigenous languages, arts, music, and
literature. Leverage AI for
Page 22 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 25
real-time language translation in all 12 official languages, while harmonizing
with international practices, and
f. Design responsible and human-centred AI tools to address rural development,
supplement healthcare, enable public services, and extend education services,
especially in indigenous languages.
4.3 Target Beneficiaries and Stakeholders
The target beneficiaries of this policy include:
a. Citizens, particularly marginalized and underserved communities.
b. Youth, children, women, and persons with disabilities.
c. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and startups.
d. Investors and the business sector.
e. Public sector entities.
f. Education and healthcare institutions.
g. Researchers and developers of AI technologies.
Key stakeholders involved in the design and rollout of AI policy include:
a. National, provincial, and local government departments.
b. Regulatory bodies.
c. Academic and research institutions.
d. Industry and professional bodies.
e. Civil society and grassroots organizations.
f. International development and governance partners.
4.4 Resource Allocations of This Policy – Human, Financial,
Equipment, and Systems
The following are the key resources which this policy seeks to allocate:
a. Human Capital: Expand public-sector (and citizens’) training in AI literacy and
governance; embed AI in basic-to-tertiary education; support local AI talent
through mentorship and exchange programmes.
b. Financial Resources: Allocate funding for infrastructure (including data
centres and supercomputing), startup support, and AI research grants. Create
incentives such as tax breaks and subsidies for private-sector collaboration.
Page 23 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

26 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
c. Equipment and Systems: Invest in AI community hubs, data infrastructure,
real-time analytics platforms, and connectivity tools like fibre networks, lowearth orbit satellites, and affordable devices, as well as energy and regulatory
systems.
4.5 Roles and Responsibilities
The following entities will play key defined roles in the regulation of AI in South Africa,
as well as their roles and contribution in the AI ecosystem.
a. Department of Communications and Digital Technologies (DCDT): Lead
the development and implementation of the national AI policy. The Department
would facilitate public-private partnerships, oversee AI regulatory compliance,
and promote digital inclusion and literacy. The DCDT would be responsible as
custodian for the national policy on AI, monitor the development of strategies
for provinces, sectors and industries (and intervene to find solutions for intersector disagreements therein), the governance and regulation of AI, as well as
the regulation of AI.
b. Department of Science, Technology and Innovation (DSTI): Its role would
be to drive research and development in AI technologies. This would include
funding AI research projects and infrastructure, support innovation hubs, and
collaborating with academic institutions to advance AI knowledge.
c. Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR): Its role would be to
conduct applied research and provide scientific support for AI initiatives. It
would contribute towards the development of AI solutions for various sectors,
offer technical expertise, and ensure the ethical use of AI technologies.
d. Technology Innovation Agency (TIA): Its role would be to support the
commercialization of AI innovations. Thus, contributing key funding and
resources for AI startups, to foster innovative ecosystems, and facilitate
technology transfer.
e. Industrial Development Corporation (IDC): Its role would be to promote
industrial growth through AI adoption. In that way, it would ensure investment
in AI-driven industrial projects, supporting the integration of AI in manufacturing,
and enhancing the competitiveness of South African industries.
Page 24 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 27
f. South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC): Its role would be to
ensure that AI technologies (and by extension the developers thereof) respect
human rights and ethical standards. It would contribute to monitoring AI
applications for compliance with human rights laws, address biases in AI
systems, and advocate for fair and transparent AI practices.
g. Information Regulator (South Africa): Its role would be to oversee data
protection and privacy in AI applications. It would contribute to ensuring that AI
systems comply with the Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA) and
Promotion of Access to Information Act (PAIA), safeguard citizens’ data
(through any other relevant legislation), and address privacy concerns related
to AI technologies.
Other key international institutions and approaches to benchmark against would be:
i. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) AI Risk Management
Framework (AI RMF 1.0).
ii. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) –
Ten core principles of a human-rights centred approach to the ethics of AI -
https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics#.
iii. International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) AI and ML
Guidance in supervising market intermediaries and asset managers.
iv. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence.
v. Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP) - Machine Learning
Security Top Ten.
4.6 Institutional Infrastructure and Arrangements Established
The following entities would be established because of this policy for regulation of AI
in South Africa.
a. National AI Commission (National AI Office): To coordinate refinements on
policy, implementation and further policy development with input from
government, industry, and civil society due to the rapidly evolving nature of AI
development. This dedicated, standalone office should coordinate AI
implementation, bring together stakeholders, and monitor progress. The
Page 25 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

28 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
relationship between the Board and the DCDT would define whether it is a
Schedule 3 Public Entity (NPC under government influence) or a more
independent NPC with partial public funding. (Some of the institutions specified
below could be “housed” in this office through various arrangements).
b. AI Ethics Board: To enforce ethical governance, and for considerations related
to bias, privacy, and fairness. Incorporate inputs received from companiesbased ethics boards in ongoing reviews of guidelines. This could be established
as a Non-Profit Company. The relationship between the Board and the DCDT
would define whether it is a Schedule 3 Public Entity (NPC under government
influence) or a more independent NPC with partial public funding.
c. AI Regulatory Authority: To monitor compliance, perform audits, and issue
certifications. Also, to audit AI systems for fairness and to conduct gender and
human rights impact assessments.
d. AI Ombudsperson Office: To allow affected individuals to challenge AI-driven
decisions and to receive redress.
e. AI Insurance Superfund: Modelled after the Road Accident Fund, to
compensate individuals or entities harmed by AI-driven outcomes. This fund
would provide a safety net in cases where liability is difficult to determine,
especially for systems operating in ambiguous decision-making spaces.
f. National AI Safety Institute: Working in concert with other similar international
bodies in advancing the science of AI safety as well as developing, updating
and disseminating guidelines for AI safety. This, as part of a risk and mitigation
approach to regulation.
g. Integrated AI-Powered Monitoring Centre: To monitor as a central nervecentre towards increasing the efficiency levels of all service delivery (and
related) touchpoints in each sector of government and society.
4.7 Regulatory Configuration for the Age of Artificial Intelligence
As a result of this policy, a National AI Commission / Office, an AI Regulatory Council,
and an AI Ethics Board will be established to coordinate strategy, monitor compliance
and enforce governance. Further, this policy actively repositions the Independent
Communication Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for an AI-driven regulatory future.
While traditionally focused on broadcasting, telecommunications, and postal services,
Page 26 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 29
ICASA will be increasingly positioned to play a crucial role in ensuring AI systems in
its domain operate ethically, transparently, and in compliance with regulatory
standards. ICASA’s evolving mandate would include overseeing ethical AI use in
telecoms, ICT and broadcasting, ensuring fairness, transparency, and nondiscrimination in content recommendation, network management, and advertising.
Working in concert with the Information Regulator, ICASA will help ensure AI systems
used by network operators and broadcasters align with data protection principles
under POPIA.
Additionally, ICASA would contribute to developing technical standards for AI in
various next generation networks and spectrum management, and it will require
algorithmic impact assessments for high-risk systems used by licensees. ICASA will
also provide guidance and offer regulatory sandboxes to support responsible AI
innovation within its sector (and related sectors). To govern AI effectively, South
Africa’s regulatory framework will benefit from a more integrated, cross-sectoral model.
A National AI Regulatory Forum, coordinated by the Department of Communications
and Digital Technologies (DCDT), will bring together ICASA, the Information
Regulator, Competition Commission, SARB, FSCA, CSIR, and DTIC to coordinate
oversight, standards, and ethical guidance.
Each regulator will maintain distinct responsibilities: ICASA on AI in digital
infrastructure and broadcasting; the Information Regulator on data privacy; the
Competition Commission on digital market fairness; and financial regulators on AI in
fintech. Shared regulatory sandboxes and innovation hubs will encourage
experimentation while ensuring safeguards. To be effective in this context, ICASA will
move beyond sectoral silos and adopt a tech-convergent (and tech-enabled) approach
through closer collaboration with other regulators. It will adopt and be capacitated with
some proactive, foresight-driven methods, enhancing its internal AI capabilities, and
modernizing compliance tools to include algorithmic audits.
ICASA will also become more participatory, engaging industry, academia, and civil
society to build inclusive and forward-looking regulatory frameworks for AI use in
communications and broadcasting. ICASA will work with other regulators worldwide in
setting up an agile, tech-based, collaborative approach to regulating AI in digital
Page 27 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

30 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
environments. South Africa’s digital services regulatory mechanism will exercise
formal coordination such as joint compliance protocols, shared audit infrastructure,
and cross-sector task teams. And this will be bolstered by an integrated, data-powered
infrastructure, centres and systems for monitoring and increasing service delivery
efficiency levels.
4.8 Communication
The policy emphasizes transparency, public engagement, and inclusive
communication through:
a. Public Awareness Campaigns: Promote understanding of AI technologies,
rights, and risks, particularly in local languages.
b. Community Platforms: Enable feedback and participation in public-sector AI
applications, and
c. Accessible Information: Ensure citizens can understand and challenge AI
decisions, with explainable AI systems required for high-risk use cases.
Page 28 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 31
5. Trends in Policy and Regulatory Options for AI in South Africa
South Africa has various policy options to navigate the complexities of AI development
in multiple sectors while promoting ethical standards, fostering economic growth, and
establishing a solid regulatory framework. The options span several critical areas:
ethics, regulatory flexibility, economic development, and international alignment. Each
option carries its own set of trade-offs and requires careful consideration of the
country’s unique socio-economic and each sector’s technological context. This policy
proposes at least four options: an ethics-first approach, a flexible iterative approach,
an economy-focused approach, and an approach that aligns with global standards and
partnerships – all suitable for different sectors and industries. Yet, a combination of
these would serve as an ideal.
5.1 Ethics-First Approach (Prioritizing Ethical AI Development)
An ethics-first approach would involve implementing stringent guidelines and
safeguards around the ethical use of AI technologies. This option could ensure robust
protections against misuse, addressing concerns around transparency, accountability,
and fairness. Emphasizing ethics aligns with South Africa’s socio-historical landscape,
where issues of fairness and inclusivity are particularly sensitive due to past inequities.
Such an approach could go a long way in building public trust and fostering social
acceptance of AI by demonstrating a commitment to responsible practices. This
approach provides a clear, protective structure for managing ethical concerns, such
as bias and discrimination, which could resonate with South Africa’s diverse society.
It is often argued that this approach could slow the pace of AI innovation, especially if
stringent guidelines increase compliance costs or discourage experimental uses of AI.
Also, it could limit opportunities for quick adoption and scaling of AI in sectors like law
enforcement and education, where faster deployment may yield significant public
benefits. Among the available options, organizations could be required to implement
ethics checklists at every development stage, ensuring that bias, fairness, and
transparency are systematically addressed.
Page 29 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

32 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
5.2 Flexible, Iterative Regulation (Enabling Innovation While
Managing Risk)
A flexible regulatory approach would entail developing adaptable strategies that evolve
with AI’s rapid technological advancements. This option could involve phased
regulations or “sandbox” environments where AI innovations are tested under
regulatory supervision before broader deployment. Such an approach allows for faster
scaling while maintaining the ability to respond to unforeseen ethical or security
concerns. As a result, regulations should be adaptable and flexible, providing for future
review as AI technologies and applications evolve, while ethical AI development allows
room for innovation. This could also include the use of technology in regulation. Among
the options would be pro-active measures of mitigating risk, including conducting
security audits specific to AI/ML and ‘red teaming’ - minimizing dependence on thirdparty datasets in the training process; an ensemble operation based on a multi-layered
protection design.
While not part of the country’s established regulatory tradition, such an approach
would support innovation by allowing AI technologies to develop in a less restrictive
environment, potentially making South Africa an attractive destination for AI startups
and investments. It would also provide regulators with real-time insights into emerging
AI applications, helping them adapt regulations based on practical experience and
observed risks. On the flip side, this approach might introduce ethical and security
risks, especially if emerging issues are not identified promptly or regulated adequately.
It could create inconsistencies in AI standards across sectors, potentially reducing
public trust in AI and complicating oversight.
5.3 Economic-Focused Strategy (Maximizing AI’s Economic
Impact)
An economic-focused approach would prioritize AI applications that directly contribute
to economic growth, such as using AI to enhance productivity in key sectors like
mining, agriculture, and public administration. This option would involve substantial
investments in AI-related education and training, as well as incentives for local AI
research and startups. Among available options could be a strategic focus on ensuring
that data is AI-ready, accessible, and governed by experts in AI and data science.
Page 30 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 33
It would help promote economic resilience by leveraging AI to create new jobs,
stimulate growth in strategic industries, and improve productivity. Further, it aligns with
South Africa’s goal of fostering a digital economy, which could help bridge economic
disparities and enhance competitiveness. However, without robust ethical and
regulatory oversight, this approach could risk exacerbating inequalities, particularly if
AI applications lead to job displacement without adequate worker reskilling. It could
lead to increased digital divides, where economic gains primarily benefit certain
sectors or regions, leaving marginalized communities without equitable access to AI’s
benefits.
5.4 Alignment with Global Standards and Partnerships
South Africa could position itself in the international AI landscape by aligning its
policies with global standards such as the OECD AI principles and collaborating with
international AI governance bodies. This approach would include developing
frameworks that are interoperable with global standards on ethics, transparency, and
data protection, fostering trust in AI both domestically and internationally. This
approach would strengthen the country’s credibility as a responsible AI actor on the
global stage, potentially attracting foreign investment and partnerships. Also, it
provides a pathway for the country to influence AI governance in Africa, establishing it
as a leader in AI ethics and governance on the continent.
However, aligning with international standards may limit South Africa’s regulatory
flexibility, potentially creating policy mismatches if global standards do not address
local needs. This approach could prioritize international competitiveness over local
socio-economic priorities, potentially stalling efforts to address historical inequities.
A combination of all the above options (depending on the innovation and safety
needs of each sector), however, would serve as an ideal approach.
There are various other approaches to regulation, including a principles-based
regulation, a guardrails approach, and a just AI approach. But before those are
considered, there must be clarity on the best policy and strategy approaches.
Page 31 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

34 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
6. Emerging Issues on the South Africa AI Policy
6.1 Ethics in AI Policy
South Africa’s national AI policy emphasizes ethical considerations as a foundational
element, aiming to build trust in AI technologies by embedding fairness, transparency,
accountability, and inclusivity into the development and deployment of AI systems.
Ethical concerns in AI revolve around ensuring that the technology respects human
rights and upholds societal values. For instance, the policy explicitly addresses bias
mitigation, aiming to reduce discrimination in AI outcomes, which is critical given South
Africa’s diverse and historically unequal society.
The ethical deployment of AI also extends to ensuring explainability and transparency,
particularly in high-stakes areas like healthcare and finance. By mandating that AI
systems be sufficiently interpretable, the policy aligns with global best practices, which
advocate for transparency to build public trust and facilitate the ethical use of AI.
Furthermore, the policy’s commitment to inclusivity recognizes the potential for AI to
either bridge or widen existing socio-economic gaps, making ethical considerations a
priority to prevent exacerbation of inequalities.
6.2 A Regulatory Framework for AI Policy
Regulating AI is a complex task, particularly in a rapidly evolving field. This policy
recognizes the need for adaptive, comprehensive regulations that address both
current and potential future challenges. This approach is informed by the policy’s
adoption of a Futures Triangle perspective, which examines the pressures from current
technology, future aspirations, and historical legacies that impact the adoption and
regulation of AI in South Africa. Key regulatory areas would include data protection and
privacy, with the policy recommending robust data governance standards. This aligns
with global trends, such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR), emphasizing that data should be collected, processed, and stored
transparently and securely. These measures aim to safeguard citizens' privacy while
supporting data-driven innovation, balancing the need for regulatory oversight with
flexibility to adapt to new developments in AI.
Page 32 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 35
The policy also proposes sector-specific regulations to address unique AI applications
in areas like public safety, healthcare, education, fintech etc. These targeted
regulations are essential as they consider the ethical implications specific to each field,
ensuring that AI applications are deployed responsibly and effectively. The policy thus
positions smart regulation not only as a mechanism for control, but also to foster an
enabling environment where AI can develop safely and ethically.
6.3 Economic Impact of AI
AI presents transformative opportunities for South Africa's economy, with the potential
to enhance productivity, create new industries, and address national challenges in
areas such as healthcare, agriculture, education, and public safety. The national AI
policy underscores AI’s role in economic development, viewing it as a key driver of the
Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) and a contributor to national economic resilience.
The policy envisages that an opportunity exists for new industries to be created
through the development of AI. By fostering an AI ecosystem that promotes innovation,
South Africa can harness AI to improve competitiveness and stimulate job creation,
particularly through support for AI startups and public-private-partnerships.
The policy’s focus on talent and capacity development is central to realizing AI’s
economic potential. Investments in AI-related education and training aim to create a
skilled workforce capable of developing and managing AI technologies. This strategic
emphasis on human capital development ensures that the economic benefits of AI are
widely distributed, promoting inclusivity in the digital economy. The policy emphasizes
a commitment to advocating for the inclusion of underrepresented communities within
the AI ecosystem, ensuring that AI technologies are accessible to all South Africans.
Moreover, the policy considers the economic risks associated with AI, such as job
displacement due to automation. It advocates for a balanced approach that combines
economic incentives for AI innovation with strategies for workforce reskilling and
upskilling. This mitigates potential adverse effects on employment, especially in
industries most susceptible to automation. Through targeted economic policies, South
Africa can leverage AI for growth while addressing potential economic challenges.
Page 33 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

36 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
6.4 Emerging Issues and the Global Context
Global AI trends do slightly influence the national AI policy, particularly regarding
international AI ethics and governance. The policy’s alignment with global standards,
such as the OECD’s recommendations on AI ethics, underscores South Africa’s
intention to participate in the global discourse on responsible AI. As AI applications
become more prevalent, issues like cybersecurity and geopolitical dynamics are
becoming increasingly important. The policy addresses these by proposing strong
cybersecurity measures to protect AI infrastructure, recognizing that vulnerabilities in
AI systems could have national security implications.
The policy also embraces sustainable development goals (SDGs), recognizing AI’s
potential to contribute to environmental sustainability. By integrating AI with
sustainable practices in agriculture and energy, the policy positions AI as a tool for
addressing climate change and resource management challenges. This approach
reflects a broader trend towards AI for Good, where AI is harnessed not just for
economic gain but for social and environmental impact as well.
Page 34 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 37
7. Governance
7.1 Performance Reporting and Accountability
The national AI policy mandates clear accountability mechanisms across AI system
development and deployment. Developers and deploying organizations are obligated
to provide sufficiently explainable AI outputs, especially in high-risk contexts such as
credit scoring, law enforcement, and healthcare. Public-sector systems are to be held
to higher standards of sufficient transparency and accountability. Institutions deploying
AI must establish traceable lines of responsibility, with a named accountable official or
entity. Oversight institutions, including the proposed AI Ethics Board and AI Regulatory
Authority, will monitor compliance, conduct audits, and assess system fairness,
including gender and human rights impact assessments. These institutions are
mandated to evaluate AI’s societal effects, enforce algorithmic transparency, and
ensure the legality and contestability of automated decisions.
7.2 Transparency and Information Dissemination
The policy adopts the principles of “sufficient explainability” and “sufficient
transparency,” ensuring that AI systems offer comprehensible outputs and visible
operational processes. Public-sector and high-risk AI systems must be auditable, and
plain-language notifications must be issued when individuals are affected by
automated decisions. Citizens must be informed of their rights and provided with
avenues to challenge algorithmic outcomes. Transparency is also ensured through
routine algorithm impact assessments, open publication of AI audits, and public
education campaigns. These mechanisms will build public trust and provide insight
into AI decision-making logic, data sources, and potential consequences.
7.3 Risk Assessment and Mitigation Strategy
While aimed at encouraging innovation, South Africa’s AI governance adopts a riskbased approach, categorizing AI systems based on levels of potential harm. The policy
draws some inspiration from the European Union AI Act and includes strict regulations
for high-risk applications. A National AI Safety Institute will be established to advance
risk science and develop safety standards with international collaboration.
Page 35 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

38 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
Key risk mitigation strategies include:
a. Regular scenario-based risk planning, Human Rights Impact Assessments
(HRIAs) and Regulatory Impact Assessments (RIAs).
b. Enhanced data governance through POPIA-aligned frameworks.
c. Bias detection and mitigation protocols, including mandatory testing of highstakes systems.
d. Legal and technical remedies for deepfakes, defamatory AI, and child-targeted
manipulative systems.
e. An AI insurance superfund to compensate affected individuals in ambiguous
liability scenarios, and
f. Cross-sector collaboration to harmonize data security and prevent the misuse
of AI technologies.
Page 36 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 39
8. Policy Monitoring, Evaluation and Review
8.1 Policy Measurement
The policy will introduce the need for detailed implementation plans emanating from
the multi-sector strategy development processes - with measurable outcomes to
enhance accountability and progress tracking. The implementation roadmap under
each sector strategy will have detailed timelines, measurable milestones, and
accountability mechanisms. There must be some well-structured and transparent
collaboration frameworks between sectors, including incentives such as tax breaks,
grants, and subsidies to encourage private-sector participation, particularly for startups
and small businesses. These must be seamless, easy to understand, and designed
with a full view of the citizen in mind. The proposed sectoral approach would ensure
that AI governance is distributed across government spheres and provinces, economic
and social sectors, each adapting to AI within their regulatory scope.
Further, an AI cross-system intelligence integration mechanism will be put in place to
combine data from different sources to provide a complete security and activity view.
The policy would foster institutional coherence by assigning clear lines of responsibility
across government departments and regulatory bodies. Further by creating a
coordinating facility for AI governance that includes independent oversight, public
institutions, and civil society representation. This means that regulators such as the
Competition Commission, and Environmental Management Inspectorate would
cooperate through established mechanism. The policy mandates the development of
implementation plans with measurable outcomes, timelines, and milestones across all
sectoral strategies. Performance indicators will be tailored to the specific focus area -
such as AI adoption rates, ethical compliance benchmarks, bias mitigation results, and
infrastructure deployment levels. Regular AI Maturity Assessment Indexing and AI
Readiness Indexing will be institutionalised to evaluate national preparedness and
progress.
8.2 Monitoring Processes
A cross-governmental, sectoral approach will underpin the monitoring of the
implementation and effects of this policy. It thus proposes:
a. Sector-specific implementation roadmaps with defined timelines and outputs.
Page 37 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

40 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
b. Regular algorithmic audits and bias testing (especially for high-risk systems).
c. Public tracking tools for procurement transparency and accountability.
d. Monitoring of inclusivity outcomes, e.g., benefits accrued to marginalized
communities, and
e. An AI cross-system intelligence integration mechanism will be introduced to
consolidate data from various sectors and enhance decision-making in realtime.
8.3 Evaluation of the Policy
Evaluation will be both formative and summative. It will:
a. Assess whether objectives (e.g., ethical AI use, inclusivity, competitiveness)
are being met.
b. Identify unintended consequences or emerging risks.
c. Include independent oversight and peer reviews to uphold objectivity.
d. Identify the patterns of improvement and otherwise, with regard to innovation,
economic impact, startup enablement.
e. Include regular human rights and gender impact assessments to evaluate
social effects of AI implementations.
Periodic independent certification of high-stakes AI applications will be enforced to
ensure that evolving practices align with the policy’s principles of fairness, safety, and
transparency.
8.4 Policy Review Schedule
The policy framework will undergo comprehensive review every three years, or earlier
if triggered by significant technological or legislative shifts. Interim evaluations will
inform mid-term updates and corrective actions. A flexible but structured review
mechanism will allow the policy to adapt to fast-paced developments in AI, ensuring
ongoing relevance and responsiveness.
Page 38 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 41
9. Strategic Pillars for the South Africa AI Policy
Strategic pillars of this AI policy are the fundamental components or key areas of focus
that support and drive the implementation of the policy's goals and objectives. They
serve as the core framework around which the policy is structured, providing clear
guidance and direction for its implementation. This policy is based on 6 Strategic
Pillars (SP).
These are:
a. Capacity and Talent Development
b. AI for Inclusive Growth and Job Creation
c. Responsible Governance
d. Ethical and Inclusive AI
e. Cultural Preservation and International Integration
f. Human-Centred Deployment
Page 39 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

42 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
Each of these pillars are built using Strategic Building Blocks (SBB) as follows:
Strategic Pillars Strategic Building Blocks
a. Capacity and Talent Development i. Education, Training and Industry
Collaboration
ii. Digital Infrastructure
b. AI for Inclusive Growth and Job i. Research, Development, and
Creation
Innovation
ii. AI for Startups, MSMEs and
Innovation
c. Responsible Governance i. Safety and Security
ii. Privacy and Data Protection
iii. Professional Responsibility
d. Ethical and Inclusive AI i. Ethical AI Guidelines Development
ii. Fairness and Mitigating Bias
e. Cultural Preservation and i. Promotion of Cultural and Human
International Integration Values
ii. Global Collaboration and
Competitiveness
f. Human-Centred Deployment i. Human Control of Technology
(Human-Centred Approach in AI
Systems)
ii. Transparency & Sufficient
Explainability
iii. Public Sector Implementation
Page 40 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 43
9.1 Strategic Pillar (SP) 1: Talent Development / Capacity
Development
9.1.1 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 1: Education, Training and
Industry Collaboration
Aim: To ensure that South Africa has a robust AI talent pool.
The inclusion of AI in school curricula is imperative for equipping students from
primary to tertiary education. This entails the education of educators in AI tools and
the integration of multilingual education where applicable. There should be training
programmes developed that cater to accreditation bodies such as the Quality Council
for Trades and Occupations (QCTO), targeting data management and AI-specific
infrastructure. Industry-academic partnerships are also crucial for experiential learning
in the practical implementation of AI, focusing on interdisciplinary teamwork, risk
management, and data stewardship.
AI education should not only focus on technical skills but also integrate Social
Sciences and Humanities to address ethical challenges and provide governance
sensitivity. This integration helps embed creativity, emotional intelligence, and critical
thinking capabilities in students. Curricula must cover ethics, biases, and societal
impacts of AI. Additionally, community-based AI education centres must be
established to promote accessibility. Upskilling and reskilling initiatives are crucial to
reduce job displacement due to AI in industries such as finance, agriculture, mining,
and logistics.
For successful deployment of AI in education, strategic talent retention measures
are required to retain qualified professionals in the country. Skilling programmes must
begin early for professionals such as educators, librarians, and researchers. Interinstitutional coordination (among all types of educational, research and innovation
institutions) is essential to prevent duplication of efforts. This will require a breaking
down of silos between schools in the same districts, rural, township and urban. In
addition, investment in assistive technologies can benefit children with disabilities
while closing the digital divide responsibly. Instituting a master institute focused on
enhancing applied research innovation and startups will ensure national accessibility
to skills development in different fields pertaining to AI.
Page 41 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

44 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
South Africa must urgently expand its human capital base to compete in the AI era.
This requires a National AI Skills Development Strategy spanning schools, TVET
colleges, universities, and lifelong learning pathways. Dedicated specialised AI
programmes should be introduced across higher education and vocational institutes,
co-designed with industry to meet labour market demand. To cultivate world-class
research talent, government would introduce competitive AI research grants,
innovation challenges, and fellowships. In parallel, diaspora engagement programmes
can facilitate knowledge transfer and mentorship, while targeted AI entrepreneurship
training and incubation hubs will strengthen the pipeline of innovators and startups.
9.1.1.1 Policy Interventions
Educational Integration: Incorporate AI education including
o
responsible use and risk management into the educational curricula from
foundational, basic education to tertiary levels. Skilling of educators and
other assistants in AI tools, as well as emphasizing multilingual education
where feasible.
Training Programmes: Develop specialized training and continuous
o
learning programmes in AI. Engage with the Quality Council for Trades
and Occupations (QCTO) to standardize AI qualifications and job roles.
Training would include data management, curation, and AI-specific data
infrastructures. Introduce AI-focused curricula and training guidelines
to prepare a future workforce. Support self-taught individuals without
necessarily having formal qualifications.
Capacity Development and Partnerships: Ensure ongoing expertise
o
and capacity development within regulatory bodies and
government agencies – creating agility. Emphasize on real-world skills
development through collaboration with industry. Foster partnerships
between academia and industry for real-world AI application training.
These partnerships would highlight interdisciplinary collaboration, risk
management, data governance, and cooperation between technical
experts and social scientists.
Page 42 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 45
STEM and Humanities Integration (towards STEAM): AI training must
o
incorporate Social Sciences and Humanities to address ethical
dilemmas and promote governance sensitivity. Also, these humancentric skills would serve to embed creativity, emotional intelligence, and
critical thinking, particularly in early learning. Embed AI education from
primary to tertiary levels with curriculums addressing ethics, biases, and
societal impacts. Launch community-driven AI education hubs, as well
as mobile training centres.
Reskilling and Upskilling Programmes: Initiatives for reskilling the
o
sectors impacted by AI aimed at alleviating job displacement. Conduct
research to project AI’s impact on jobs, particularly in sectors like
finance, agriculture, mining, and logistics. Because the AI era will result
in the creation of new professions, the country must put in place an
appropriate labour market transition strategy. Support unemployed
individuals and adults in general to acquire skills through internet
resources, with micro-credentialing – as well as various informal learning
pathways. Also, by mapping the industries which are likely to be affected
by AI-driven disruptions.
Strategic Retention of Talent: Implement a more focused approach to
o
retain skilled professionals in the country, which is crucial for building a
robust AI sector. Develop international exchange programmes to
ensure an infusion of skills and technology. Utilize AI tools to craft a
responsive educational curriculum, also to review and re-iterate.
Develop educational sector strategies for deploying and implementing AI
(with responsible use of personal and other data) – including the
responsible use of predictive sets for early career guidance. Encourage
diaspora knowledge transfer programmes to bring back skills from South
Africans abroad.
Upskilling and Cooperation: Implement special skilling programmes
o
upfront for key information custodians - educators, librarians, and
archivists, etc. Also, for researchers, entrepreneurs and postgraduate
Page 43 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

46 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
students. Bolster cooperation between academic, innovation and
research institutions to streamline efforts and avoid duplication. And
ensure that educational and research institutions (including rural and
urban schools) share resources to break down silos in similar and
adjacent districts.
AI-related skills development must go beyond advanced research and
o
coding to include technical education, artisanship training, and sectorspecific capacity-building. This will ensure that South Africa’s
masterplans in manufacturing, mining, and other industrial sectors are
supported by a workforce capable of adopting and deploying AI
solutions.
Invest in Assistive AI Technologies to support children with
o
disabilities, ensuring inclusive access to education and essential
services. Invest in addressing the digital divide, while giving attention to
measures which would enable children. AI tools should prioritize
inclusivity and respect children’s cognitive abilities. Also, ensure that
these tools would honestly state the functionalities and limitations which
they possess and avoid amplifying disparities when directed at children.
Master AI Institute: Review the mandate of the Artificial Institute of
o
South Africa and ensure it sufficiently funded and capacitated to
spearhead the diffusion of relevant skills, entrepreneurship, applied
research and innovation for the benefit of the country and continent.
Further, establish an effective creative AI, big data analytics, blockchain,
and cybersecurity capacity-building infrastructure.
▪ This should be a key part of an ever-growing ecosystem of skills,
research and innovation apparatus – which would be available
country-wide and online.
▪ This should build on the work which the DCDT has started, with
hubs located in various learning, research and innovation
institutions – including international linkages.
Page 44 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 47
9.1.2 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 2: Digital Infrastructure
Aim: To advance technological capabilities and drive innovation
To enable the adoption of AI in South Africa, there is a requirement to establish
effective and affordable supercomputing infrastructure. This includes giving top priority
to access such infrastructure for learning and research - and setting up a national data
centre and a related computing network to improve the country's computing power
index. Moreover, it is essential to invest in digital connectivity technologies such as
5G, 6G and high-capacity fibre. Priority should be accorded to last-mile connectivity
via low earth orbiting satellites to deal with hurdles in non-local digital infrastructure
access. Granting access to 5G, and future 6G and broadband networks to everyone
and sunsetting legacy systems is crucial. Universal internet access can be addressed
by declaring it a socio-economic right. Monitoring the effect of price decreases on lowend devices must be conducted to make technology affordable. Creating AI community
centres in under-served communities allows for AI literacy and training, involving rural
businesses in rural infrastructure development.
South Africa must promote investment in connectivity infrastructure using
international cloud-based services either by collaboration with foreign providers and/or
regional supercomputing centres. However, there is an issue of security when using
foreign infrastructure, infringing on data privacy. Therefore, investment in domestic
infrastructure is also needed, to ensure data sovereignty. Development of shared
supercomputing centres such as AI giga-factories facilitates startups and researchers
and promotes sector-specific regulation compliance. Development of secure data
repositories promotes safe access to knowledge. Yet there is a need to reduce
environmental degradation from the energy demands of data centres.
9.1.2.1 Policy Interventions
Supercomputing Infrastructure: Develop robust and cost-effective
o
supercomputing infrastructure to support AI research and development.
Prioritize access to supercomputing infrastructure for education and
innovation. Develop and implement a plan for national data centres with
Page 45 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

48 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
related national computing network, to increase South Africa’s national
computing power index. Prioritize investments in digital infrastructure
that leverages on global cloud-based solutions. Partner with
international cloud providers and regional supercomputing hubs;
and use offshore capabilities and strategic partnerships to mitigate
against the possibly negative effects of the high energy demand, and to
reduce the strain on local infrastructure.
▪ A contrary view is that reliance on foreign infrastructure
compromises the security of sensitive South African data. And
therefore, there is a need to invest in local infrastructure and
related data sovereignty measures to safeguard the national
interest. Acknowledge and create plans to reduce the country’s
current hardware dependence on the US and China (in the
context of their geopolitical rivalry).
Digital Connectivity: Invest in digital infrastructure and advanced
o
connectivity technologies like 5G, future 6G and high-capacity fibre
networks. Focus on last mile connectivity, including the use of satellite
technologies, and address the barriers to accessing non-local digital
infrastructure. Prioritize expansion of infrastructure, affordable
connectivity and unlocking South Africa’s public and private data
holdings to enable locally driven AI solutions. Create shared
supercomputing facilities such as AI giga-factories for startups and
researchers.
Establish Regional AI Factories to enhance AI sovereignty and
o
inclusive innovation throughout South Africa. These decentralized hubs
will foster local data control, drive sector-specific AI solutions, and
stimulate regional economies.
Universal Access and Affordability: Accelerate broadband and 5G
o
(and future 6G) rollout and phase out legacy networks – while framing
universal internet connectivity as a fundamental socio-economic right.
Access to electronic equipment is a prerequisite for integrating AI
Page 46 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 49
into education systems at all levels. This includes equitable access to
hardware, connectivity, and infrastructure to ensure inclusive
participation. Monitor the impact of the reduction of prices on low-end
devices (smartphones/tablets) for low-income households.
Reaching the last mile: Create cost-effective, accessible digital
o
infrastructure to support AI adoption – including the use of satellite
systems. Create government-led investments to address infrastructure,
electricity, and digital tools. Expand low-cost, high-speed internet
coverage in rural and underserved areas to ensure that these
communities can participate in the AI-driven economy. Develop
community-based connectivity solutions such as Wi-Fi hotspots, digital
hubs, and mobile network extensions tailored to rural and peri-urban
areas.
Infrastructure-Readiness: Emphasize on data infrastructure
o
readiness mechanisms while also establishing trusted data
repositories to ensure secure and compliant access to information. Put
measures in place to mitigate against the environmental impact on
infrastructure (particularly significant consumption of electricity and
water by data centres). As ICT protocols become outmoded and
superseded with new ones, the standards for telecommunications
technologies and digital infrastructure should enable the growth and
development as well as effective deployment of AI products.
Energy Preparedness for the AI Age: Take specific measures to
o
ensure the availability of electricity, water and other environmental
resources to power the operation of appropriate levels of compute
resources (and provide favourable terms for locally based data centres
in the national energy mix). Similarly, ensure the long-term availability of
appropriate critical minerals and rare earth resources for the AI age.
Establish AI community centres and hubs in underserved regions to
o
promote AI literacy and training. Involve local businesses in rural
infrastructure development. Create equitable digital access for schools
Page 47 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

50 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
and community centres. Also create collaboration mechanisms between
government and private hyperscalers, as well as encourage the
development of energy-efficient data centres. Facilitate sectorspecific strategies ensuring seamless regulatory alignment.
▪ Investigate the effect of quantum computing and open-source
tools on the expected evolution of AI and prepare the national
infrastructure accordingly.
9.2 Strategic Pillar (SP) 2: AI for Inclusive Growth and Job
Creation
9.2.1 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 1: Research, Development, and
Innovation
Aim: To advance technological capabilities and drive innovation.
South Africa plans to set up and sponsor specialized AI research institutions on top
of what already exists, such as the partnerships of national research conducted in
basic, specialized, and applied AI research across various universities. The country
will prioritize such projects as those which are building scientific knowledge on
machine intelligence. Investing in AI research, development, and infrastructure is key
to fostering innovation. Encouraging collaborations among academia, industry, and
the government is essential to make local innovation a top priority. These involve
offering economic incentives and capital grants to local AI startups. The creation of
institutions which encourage inter-disciplinary collaborations between industry and
academia for AI technology development is important. Additionally, regulatory
sandboxes need to be strengthened to experiment with privacy-preserving AI
applications.
To build a healthy startup culture with AI assistance, extensive research on its
technicalities is required. Policy formulation needs to be aimed at highly capable
foundation models with regulatory milestones defined to prevent one-size-fits-all
policies. Frameworks need to be established for making postgraduate research data
available for utilising solutions from institutions. Additionally, embracing a dynamic way
of developing technologies such as quantum computing and open-source tools will
Page 48 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 51
make us future-ready while maintaining technology neutrality in policy formulation.
AI represents a critical lever for economic growth, productivity, and industrial
competitiveness. To drive this transformation, South Africa would establish AI Centres
of Excellence through government–industry co-funding, serving as hubs of innovation
and application. Economic impact must be measurable, with quantifiable adoption
targets for increasing AI uptake in priority NDP sectors. Dedicated sector-specific AI
roadmaps are essential to accelerate adoption in areas such as healthcare,
agriculture, education, finance, and manufacturing. This will be supported through
targeted subsidies, tax incentives, and procurement policies, ensuring that AI
technologies become embedded across industries. To scale innovation, AI startups
and MSMEs must be supported through grants, compute credits, and access to critical
datasets.
9.2.1.1 Policy Interventions
Research Centres: Establish and appropriately fund dedicated AI
o
research centres. Also scale and monetize the outputs of existing
institutions (e.g., CSIR). Enhance regulatory sandboxes to test privacypreserving AI applications. Initiate a review of the country’s exchangecontrol systems to encourage the export of IP and the repatriation of
funds. Strategic funding from the government and private sector can
spur advancements and enhance the country's competitiveness in the
global AI landscape.
Public-Private Partnerships: Promote collaborations between
o
academia, industry, and government – and prioritize South African
innovation. Provide dedicated financial support, regulatory practices
and incentives for AI research and local AI startups. And advocate for
technology neutrality, ensuring that the AI policy does not prescribe
specific technologies or service providers. Develop a coordinated
national AI innovation ecosystem which supports industrial
development and innovativeness.
Conduct in-depth research into AI's technical complexities and use
o
AI to foster a thriving startup ecosystem. Create mechanisms to make
Page 49 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

52 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
the postgraduate research data of each institution easily accessible to
utilize and harness the solutions which come from these institutions. For
future-readiness and cost-effectiveness, the country must employ a
more dynamic approach to foster evolving technologies such as
quantum computing and opensource tools. Create an environment
where open-source tools are widely utilized in the development of AI
applications. Further policy development related to highly capable AI
foundation models will be required. Some of these models present
unpredictable risks and require a definition of different regulatory
thresholds to avoid a one-size-fits-all regulatory regime.
9.2.2 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 2: AI for Startups, MSMEs and
Innovation
Aim: To ensure startups and MSMEs effectively leverage AI technologies.
South Africa plans to establish AI accelerators based on successful mentorship
and funding schemes such as Singapore's. The accelerators would assist startups in
terms of resources to scale up. The aim is to, where possible, provide equity-free
funding, mentorship, and exposure to a network of international experts and investors.
To promote innovation while avoiding unfairness, South Africa will create regulatory
sandboxes that allow micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and startups to
pilot AI innovations under observation. It does so across industries with co-funding
models. It incentivises social entrepreneurs, MSMEs, youth-owned, and womenowned startups, providing government with legal exemptions to preferentially
purchase from them.
Incentives in the form of tax credits, financing from an AI Innovation Fund, and
grants will be provided after the likes of examples from around the globe such as
Canada's Strategic Innovation Fund. Data is treated as a public good to promote fair
development through open data initiatives. Public institutions that are within data
ecosystems will be paid to finance innovations. In doing so, South Africa aims to foster
an environment that will stimulate domestic innovation without making regulatory
systems rigid enough to smother technological developments. As a result, South Africa
Page 50 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 53
will establish a vibrant, well-supported digital startups ecosystem by fostering AIrelated R&D, promote entrepreneurship, and enable industrial applications of AI. This
will be achieved through coordinated innovation funding, sectoral innovation hubs, and
support for startups that contribute to industrial competitiveness and digital trade.
9.2.2.1 Policy Interventions
AI Accelerators: Create accelerators along the lines of Singapore’s
o
mentorship and funding models. Offer tax breaks, funding mechanisms
(AI Innovation Fund) and grants for AI adoption, drawing on global
examples like Canada’s Strategic Innovation Fund. Encourage and
fund social entrepreneurs, small and medium-sized enterprises,
women, and youth-led startups to spark local innovation. Create legal
exemptions enabling government to procure solutions directly
from social entrepreneurs, small and medium-sized enterprises,
women, and youth-led startups, as well as academic, research and
innovation institutions which have benefitted from government funding
and establishment support.
Regulatory Sandboxes: Establish AI testing environments for MSMEs
o
and startups, to ensure the testing of AI innovations under regulatory
oversight to prevent dominant interests from undermining fairness.
These testing environments would span various sectors and industries,
with appropriate cooperation and co-funding mechanisms. South Africa
would facilitate a sandbox approach to innovation, where AI is a
significant component. All regulatory measures would take into account
the innovative nature of technology-based startups and would be
applied in an adaptable and flexible manner which allows room for
innovation.
Non-private/non-regulated data must be treated as a public good to
o
drive equitable development, thus encouraging open data initiatives and
data commons. Local personal data provides market intelligence and
many other advantages – thus it must be treated as a public good.
Compensate the public institutions appropriately for their
Page 51 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

54 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
contributions in the development of data ecosystems – to support
innovations. Also, create incentives for public, academic and private sector to
contribute to open data initiatives.
AI must also be harnessed to drive industrial transformation,
o
reconfigure supply chains, and support businesses in adapting to the
platform economy. This includes enabling firms to reprogramme their
operations, investments, and customer engagement for participation in
digital markets.
9.3 Strategic Pillar (SP) 3: Responsible Governance
9.3.1 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 1: Safety and Security
Aim: To protect citizens and infrastructure.
Cybersecurity in South Africa targets the installation of robust controls for the
protection of AI systems and information against mal-use or meddling. This covers the
identification of strategic risks including detrimental bias and AI abuse. There ought to
be a mechanism of risk management that can cater to these threats based on
prevailing local socio-economic realities and vulnerabilities in technology. The larger
digital presence in AI systems comes with enormous data protection threats, especially
in handling personal data at scale. Solutions must deal with these threats while
facilitating seamless but secure collaboration among state actors and private actors
via established data sharing protocols. It also becomes important to safeguard children
against manipulative AI systems such as exploitative advertising.
Impeccable technical and legal remedies for Deep-fakes and Defamatory AI need
to be established. Further, establishing an AI insurance superfund can serve as a
guarantee of compensation for damages resulting from AI-based decisions in which
liability is unclear. A National AI Safety Institute will establish the art of AI safety by
creating standards with the assistance of international organizations. Ongoing
scenario-based risk planning for AI systems and Regulatory Impact Assessments
(RIAs) will be done. Safeguarding South African data ownership in handling third-party
suppliers is essential. Following a model that is like the EU's high-risk application
classification is a sound way of handling potential risks. Cooperation with regulatory
Page 52 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 55
authorities such as the Information Regulator will combat misinformation online
practices.
South Africa will ensure that AI-related policies on data management, industry
regulation, and digital trade are harmonised, thereby strengthening trust and
accountability. Governance would combine proactive monitoring with crisis response
protocols, creating and updating appropriate playbooks, while ensuring technical,
societal, and ethical impacts are assessed. Ongoing stakeholder feedback would
guide continuous improvement and help manage emerging risks effectively.
Effective governance is the backbone of a trusted AI ecosystem. South Africa
would implement AI-specific data governance frameworks that ensure provenance,
quality control, and interoperability of datasets. To measure progress, a National AI
Maturity Index would be established to track adoption, readiness, and impact across
sectors. Government institutions would also strengthen capacity through executivelevel digital transformation leadership roles such as Chief AI or Digital Officers, backed
by specialised training for public officials. To ensure accountability, mandatory
reporting frameworks for AI deployments in the public sector will be introduced,
reinforcing transparency and public trust.
9.3.1.1 Policy Interventions
Cybersecurity Measures: Implement robust cybersecurity protocols to
o
safeguard AI systems and data from unlawful access or acquisition of
data and to prevent attempts to alter their behaviour or performance by
bad actors. Identify strategic risks, such as harmful bias and misuse of
AI. Solutions must also address data protection risks arising from
expanded digital access, particularly in AI systems that process personal
information at scale.
Risk Management: Develop frameworks to identify and mitigate risks
o
associated with AI. Include a risk management framework that considers
local socio-economic conditions and technological vulnerabilities.
Develop data sharing protocols to facilitate seamless yet secure
Page 53 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

56 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
collaboration between state institutions and private entities, ensuring
that innovation does not compromise privacy. Apply these protocols in
electronic government systems and applications also.
Stage regular scenario-based risk planning for AI systems, as well as
o
Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA). By applying an approach like
the EU AI Act which categorises AI systems based on risk levels and
imposes stricter regulations on high-risk applications, South Africa
would manage potential risks effectively. Develop capacity to research
specific risks related to South Africa and the continent of Africa. And
prioritize South African data ownership and protect citizen data when
dealing with 3rd party vendors.
Protect children from manipulative AI systems, such as predatory
o
advertising, gamified features that encourage excessive screen time,
and other exploitative practices. AI systems must be prevented from
exploiting children’s behavioural patterns for commercial gain.
Strengthen the work of the Information Regulator to counter
o
misinformation, disinformation and other harmful online practices. And
provide as well as capacitate clear technical and legal recourse
against the use of Deepfakes and Defamatory AI.
▪ Create an AI Insurance Superfund, modelled after the Road
Accident Fund, to compensate individuals or entities harmed by
AI-driven outcomes. This fund would provide a safety net in cases
where liability is difficult to determine, especially for systems
operating in ambiguous decision-making spaces.
▪ Create a National AI Safety Institute, working in concert with
other similar international bodies in advancing the science of AI
safety as well as developing, updating and disseminating
guidelines and playbooks for AI safety. This, as part of a risk and
mitigation approach to regulation.
Page 54 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 57
9.3.2 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 2: Privacy and Data Protection
Aim: To safeguard personal information and to ensure protection of data in general.
The national AI policy is aimed at crafting standard data creation and usage
procedures for the private and public sectors. It aims to enhance the existing data
protection legislation so that wider measures can be taken. Transparency is one of the
highlighted aspects regarding the use of AI data, particularly the handling protocol of
sensitive information. The policy harmonizes AI privacy controls with the Protection of
Personal Information Act (POPIA) to protect privacy rights of individuals, applying its
eight conditions strictly. It is also harmonized with laws such as the Cybercrimes Act,
Consumer Protection Act, and Electronic Communications and Transactions Act.
Intellectual Property (IP) rights are also given precedence, especially for large
language models (LLMs), with mandatory watermarking to secure developers' rights.
To ensure safe cross-border data flows without loss of sovereignty, South Africa
will put its National Policy on Data and Cloud into action. It will create precise
parameters for cross-border data flows in the financial sector, e-commerce, logistics,
and healthcare. Such policies will complement regional ones such as the African
Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). Research will also be done on how AI
platforms handle customer data to ensure sufficient remedies when necessary. The
policy places focus on the application of principles like "data protection by design,"
accountability, data minimisation, purpose limitation, storage limitation. Safeguarding
citizens' data in government third-party procurement is imperative in upholding South
African data sovereignty in public procurement and other areas.
9.3.2.1 Policy Interventions
Data Protection and Governance: Strengthen existing data protection
o
regulations and create legislation to ensure broader regulatory
measures. Establish standardized data generation and utilization
practices across public and private sectors. Align AI privacy measures
with the Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA) to safeguard
individual rights to privacy. Ensure strict enforcement of the Act’s 8
conditions for lawful processing of data. Emphasize on the application of
Page 55 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

58 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
data protection principles such as data protection by design and
default, accountability, data minimisation, purpose limitation and
storage limitation.
Data Handling & Transparency: Ensure transparency in AI data usage
o
and storage practices. Apply secure data handling protocols for
process-sensitive information in all critical areas of society and the
economy. Section 32 of POPIA, for instance, governs the processing of
health data while upholding confidentiality. Further, this necessitates the
use of Privacy Impact Assessments. Treat Intellectual Property (IP)
rights as a critical area for AI governance, particularly regarding the use
of copyrighted materials to train large language models (LLMs). This
requires mandatory water-markings to protect the rights of developers,
as well as fair intellectual property regulation of AI innovation and AI
creations.
Connect the AI Policy to existing legislation like the Cybercrimes Act,
o
Consumer Protection Act, and the Electronic Communications and
Transactions Act. And adopt a risk-based privacy approach to prevent
over-regulation. Conduct research on AI software websites and
platforms for their management of customer data. Ensure appropriate
remedies. Protect citizen- and other people’s-data in the case of thirdparty procurement by the South African government. The maintenance
of South Africans’ data sovereignty in public procurement and
other areas is essential.
Facilitate cross-border data transfers in AI data processing by
o
implementing the National Policy on Data and Cloud to ensure data
security and sovereignty – and to prevent perpetuation of colonial-era
data extraction practices.
▪ Prioritize the application of clear protocols for global data flows
for AI applications in sectors like financial services, ecommerce, logistics and health care. Use these mechanisms
Page 56 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 59
to give effect to the African Continental Free Trade Area
(AfCFTA), Southern African Customs Union, Single Digital
African Market, and AU and SADC protocols.
9.3.3 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 3: Professional Responsibility
Aim: To foster responsible AI development and use.
The policy focuses on the need to develop a code of conduct for AI professionals.
This is part of wider initiatives to bring AI development and use in line with ethical
values and principles. The policy also calls for integrating ethics training into
professional development and learning in AI so that professionals can meet the ethical
issues arising from their work. There must be a clear definition of an AI professional,
and whether South Africa needs a specialist professional body for purposes of
accreditation. This would include making use of existing institutions such as the
Institute of Directors and the Ethics Institute to create specific ethical standards for
developers, organizations, and end-users.
Organizations with AI must be held accountable for the actions of their systems
through having clear accountability lines. Provisions must be made for handling any
adverse effects, and lastly, the accountability must be traceable to a specific official or
organization. This promotes transparency and trust in how organizations manage their
use of technology. These measures are complemented by South Africa's more
detailed policy aims towards securing responsible innovation as well as the avoidance
of unwanted implications from AI technology. Through encouraging professional
ethical behaviour and business responsibility, South Africa is seeking to provide an
environment allowing technological change's advantages to be distributed fairly
throughout society.
9.3.3.1 Policy Interventions
Develop a clear definition of an AI professional, including whether
o
South Africa should create a dedicated professional body for AI
accreditation, including for developers, organizations, or end-users.
Leverage professional bodies such as the Institute of Directors as well
Page 57 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

60 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
as the Ethics Institute, to develop ethical standards. This is so that the
training would be tailored for professionals and non-professionals.
Create the code of conduct for AI professionals. And integrate ethics
training into AI education and professional development.
Accountability: Organizations must take responsibility for the outcomes
o
of their AI systems. This includes establishing clear lines of
accountability and mechanisms for addressing any negative impacts.
This accountability must ultimately point to an attributable official or
entity.
9.4 Strategic Pillar (SP) 4: Ethical and Inclusive AI
9.4.1 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 1: Ethical AI Guidelines
Development
Aim: To ensure responsible and ethical development, deployment and use of AI.
South Africa's approach to AI emphasizes ethical development and deployment,
focusing on principles such as fairness, transparency, accountability, inclusivity,
confidentiality, human autonomy, reliability, and accountability. The preservation of
democracy is a key focus in AI development and deployment to ensure that AI systems
support democratic values rather than undermine them. A targeted regulatory
approach is proposed to regulate high-risk AI systems while introducing proportional
controls based on risk levels. The regulatory framework aims to classify AI systems by
risk levels and implement strict protections for critical infrastructure like financial
systems. Guidelines for responsible AI practices will align with human rights principles
such as privacy and access to information. Sector-specific guidelines are planned for
industries like law enforcement and healthcare. An independent AI Ethics Board will
be established to enforce ethical governance regarding bias and fairness. Additionally,
a National AI Commission/Office will coordinate policy development with input from
government, industry, and civil society.
To ensure robust oversight throughout the full lifecycle of AI (design through to
decommissioning), governance guidelines are being developed. A child-centric ethical
framework integrating international standards like POPIA will safeguard children's data
Page 58 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 61
by minimizing collection and using anonymization techniques. An AI Ombudsperson
office will allow individuals to challenge decisions made by AI-driven systems. Multiple
regulatory bodies such as the Information Regulator will play clearly defined roles in
governing South Africa's use of technology responsibly.
The adoption of AI in South Africa must remain firmly rooted in human rights and
social justice. This includes mandatory gender and human rights impact assessments
for all AI systems, particularly in high-risk domains. Oversight will be strengthened
through independent certification of high-risk AI applications, with results made
accessible through public audit reports. Inclusivity is paramount: AI must be harnessed
to advance disability inclusion by supporting assistive technologies and accessibility
tools, while child-centric principles should safeguard young people in education
systems, commerce and online platforms. Together, these measures will entrench
fairness and inclusivity in the national AI ecosystem.
9.4.1.1 Policy Interventions
Ethical Development and Deployment: Make the preservation of
o
Democracy a key focus in the development, deployment and use of AI.
Ensure that AI systems are designed and implemented with ethical
considerations at the forefront, with a focus on the impact that the AI
would have on people, addressing issues which include bias, fairness,
transparency, justification, inclusivity, confidentiality, limitations, human
autonomy, reliability, and accountability. In defining the approach to
social equity, the country would emphasize on the ethical
development and deployment of AI. The principle of nonmaleficence in AI emphasizes the importance of safety and ethical
considerations in AI development.
Targeted Regulatory Approach: Identify and regulate high-risk AI
o
systems, such as those which control critical infrastructure (e.g.,
water systems, energy grids, and emergency responses), also consumer
decision-making systems. Introduce the notion of “proportional controls.”
A Targeted Regulatory Approach would provide
Page 59 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

62 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
a nuanced method which distinguishes between the various types of AI
and their related risks and opportunities. This is because some AIs are
used for such diverse activities as content generation content,
classifying, recognition, processing, translation, negotiation, analysis,
design, editing, detection, recommendation, control, automation,
modelling, monitoring, navigation, simulation, auditing, prediction, etc.
▪ A Risk and Opportunities Approach to AI governance and
regulation should be at the forefront of policy. And incorporate
global best practice including NIST AI Risk Management
Framework and ISO/IEC 42001. Emphasize a fair balance
between policy-level oversight and organizational-level
compliance to encourage safe and transparent AI adoption.
Use Technology-Centric Regulation: And focus on applications that
o
have the most significant impact on individuals' safety and rights.
Classify AI systems according to risk levels and have strict protections
to ensure operational resilience for the country’s financial systems. And
create guidelines for responsible AI practices, ensuring alignment with
human rights principles, including the right to privacy and the right of
access to information as enshrined in the Bill of Rights. Also, initiate
further and ongoing development of sector-specific guidelines tailored
to industries such as law enforcement, healthcare and finance.
▪ Establish an independent AI Ethics Board to enforce ethical
governance, and for considerations related to bias, privacy, and
fairness. Incorporate inputs received from companies-based
ethics boards in ongoing reviews of guidelines.
▪ Establish a National AI Commission / Office to coordinate
refinements on policy, implementation and further policy
development with input from government, industry, and civil
society due to the rapidly evolving nature of AI development. This
dedicated, standalone office should coordinate AI
Page 60 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 63
implementation, bring together stakeholders, and monitor
progress (and should be the nerve-centre of the various national
AI implementation measures).
▪ Establish an AI Regulatory Authority to monitor compliance,
perform audits, and issue certifications. Also, to audit AI systems
for fairness and to conduct gender and human rights impact
assessments.
▪ Establish an AI Ombudsperson office to allow affected
individuals to challenge AI-driven decisions and to receive
redress.
Utilize the current institutional frameworks effectively: Establish
o
collaboration mechanisms between regulatory bodies with entities
such as the South African Reserve Bank and Financial Sector
Contingency Forum to manage AI-related operational risks. This policy
emphasizes the roles of multiple regulatory bodies whose mandate is
relevant to the governance of AI in South Africa. These include:
▪ The Information Regulator
▪ Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
▪ Competition Commission of South Africa
▪ The Department of Environmental Affairs through its
Environmental Management Inspectorate
▪ Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
Incorporate the full AI lifecycle - from design to deployment,
o
maintenance, and decommissioning - into governance guidelines to
ensure robust oversight. Utilize a mixture of horizontal and vertical
regulatory approaches because, while AI is systemic and its impacts
flow across multiple sectors and domains, there is a need for regulations
which are sector specific.
Page 61 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

64 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
▪ OPTION: The policy advocates for principles-based regulation
rather than prescriptive rules to ensure agility.
▪ OPTION: The policy advocates for guardrails approach to both
the policy and regulation of AI because of the prevailing resourceconstrained and uncertain environment. Thus, there will be a
need to define the boundaries in which technology change can be
executed in a manner that is aligned with organisational strategy,
risk, architecture, operational and cyber security requirements.
▪ OPTION: The policy advocates for a Just AI approach, explicitly
focused on redressing inequalities through equitable access to AI
opportunities. Integrate second-generation rights (economic
justice) and third-generation rights (environmental sustainability)
into AI governance to ensure equity, accountability, and inclusive
development.
▪ OPTION: The AI policy could lead to the Development of
Legislation in sectors where it is appropriate; beyond the
development of sector strategies and guidelines.
✓ Legislation could be designed to regulate organisations at
three technology stack levels: applications, model, and
infrastructure. And the key would be to create legal
protections first related to AI at the applications layer,
where people's safety and rights are most affected.
To foster adherence to rules and norms, this policy identifies 6 key
o
principles of responsible AI:
▪ Fairness
▪ Reliability and safety
▪ Privacy and security
▪ Inclusiveness
▪ Transparency
▪ Accountability.
Page 62 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 65
9.4.2 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 2: Fairness and Mitigating Bias
Aim: To ensure equitable AI deployment.
AI bias refers to the discriminatory data and algorithms that are inadvertently
embedded in AI models, leading to biased outcomes at scale. This is distinct from
intentionally designed biases for specific decision-making purposes. To address this
issue, South Africa aims to develop methods for identifying and mitigating biases in AI
systems. Key strategies include ensuring that AI systems are trained on diverse
datasets representing all demographics. Algorithms should be frequently tested for
biased outcomes. Significant investments will be made in local data collection to
develop African-relevant datasets, promoting diverse and inclusive values. Supporting
localized AI solutions helps address historical socio-economic disparities, enhancing
South African sovereignty in technology.
Ethical guidelines will be developed to address dilemmas such as data bias. An
independent oversight body will conduct certifications of high-stakes AI applications,
with public access provided to system audits. Mandatory gender and human rights
impact assessments will also be introduced to identify potential disparities.
Communities affected by disabilities must be directly involved in discussions about
relevant AI applications, ensuring their needs are considered during policy formulation.
Additionally, efforts will focus on enhancing how AI assists individuals with visual,
aural, learning, or other physical disabilities.
South Africa’s AI strategy must not only reflect global best practice but also
safeguard its African identity. This requires alignment with AU Agenda 2063, the AU
Continental AI Strategy, and G20 frameworks to strengthen coherence and
international positioning. To promote African sovereignty in the digital era, regional AI
factories and federated African data platforms should be developed, ensuring shared
infrastructure and collective resilience. In addition, South Africa would partner in
building continental cooperation platforms for standards, skills, and R&D, while
expanding its leadership role in global AI governance through active participation in
the UN, OECD, UNESCO, and ITU. Equally, the country would prioritise AI
Page 63 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

66 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
applications that preserve local languages and cultural heritage, affirming its unique
African contribution to global AI.
9.4.2.1 Policy Interventions
(There is a difference between AIs which are designed to make specific
o
decisions considering a specific bias which would be legitimately fed into
them, and AI bias which refers to discriminatory data and algorithms
which gets incorrectly baked into AI models, resulting in models which
deploy biases at large scale. The latter are often found in algorithms, the
data, regulations, use of the systems, and deployment).
Bias Mitigation: Develop methods to identify and mitigate biases in
o
systems using AI. Ensure AI systems are trained on diverse data sets
representing all demographics. And further test algorithms used on
relevant applications or outcomes for biased outcomes frequently.
Introduce mandatory gender and human rights impact assessments
to address potential disparities in AI applications.
Make significant investments in local data collection and the
o
development of Africa-relevant datasets, ensuring AI systems reflect
diverse and inclusive values. Support the development of localized AI
solutions that address historical socio-economic disparities to promote
South African sovereignty in technology.
Differentiate between legitimate academic practices such as Text and
o
Data Mining (TDM) and AI web scraping. Research and address the
ethical implications of AI systems in moderating online content,
particularly in preventing misinformation and disinformation.
Create an independent oversight body to conduct independent
o
certification of high-stakes AI applications and create public access to
AI system audits. Conduct frequent bias testing of AI systems and
specify the levels of competence for individuals who would oversee
high-stakes AI. Develop ethical guidelines to address specific ethical
Page 64 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 67
dilemmas associated with AI, such as data bias and AI procurement
standards for both public and private sectors.
Enhance the ways by which AI would help people with visual, aural,
o
learning and other physical disabilities. Ensure direct involvement
of communities affected by disabilities in discussions about AI
applications that could benefit them, ensuring their needs are considered
in policy formulation. And create child-centric ethical principles – and
integrate such frameworks as POPIA, EU-GDPR, AU-CAIS, and USCOPPA – in ensuring the correct management of child-data.
▪ Minimize the collection of data related to children - and use
techniques like anonymization or pseudonymization to safeguard
identities.
9.5 Strategic Pillar (SP) 5: Cultural Preservation and International
Integration
9.5.1 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 1: Promotion of Cultural and
Human Values
Aim: To align AI development with societal values.
The policy is built on the creation of value-based AI systems that support human
flourishing, equality, and environmental care. This approach is aligned with
international best practices while responding to distinctive socio-economic challenges
and norms in the nation. It places emphasis on the engagement of stakeholder
participation centred on inclusive societies participating in the design and deployment
of AI for ensuring social value alignment. For inclusivity, stakeholder engagement is
promoted across different phases in the life cycle of AI. Feedback mechanisms are
embedded in AI applications to offer pathways for updates based on lessons learned.
Localized ethical standards are offered based on OECD/UNESCO standards to
reverse past imbalances. Cultural preservation is also encouraged through digitization
of indigenous languages, arts, music, and literature using AI tools.
Page 65 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

68 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
AI technologies will be developed to solve rural development challenges,
supplement the healthcare of unserved areas, and stretch education in indigenous
languages. Collaborations with tertiary institution-startups are to create products which
capture the culture of South Africa without diminishing human-centric needs. Ubuntu
as an African philosophy is the base for the projects through interdependence and the
sense of community responsibility in the implementation of AI systems to reach the
greater good while accepting diversity. Along with these objectives, awards and grants
for projects that advance cultural preservation, social justice, and human well-being
with AI will be set up. Investigation of language models that facilitate marginalized
African languages is also a strategic focus area. Public broadcasting organizations'
content will be made reasonably available to developers without overwhelming these
sources. Through real-time language translation capabilities in all 12 official languages
of South Africa using AI tools can bridge communication gaps across the nation.
Overall, South Africa's strategy envisions not just technological progress but
socially benevolent convergence of technology with the moral codes of society which
embodies fairness, transparency and accountability.
9.5.1.1 Policy Interventions
Value-Based AI: Develop AI systems that promote human well-being,
o
equality, and environmental sustainability. Involve diverse stakeholders
in the AI policy-making process to ensure alignment with societal values.
Align with South Africa’s cultural diversity and ethical principles. Develop
context-specific ethical frameworks and guidelines aligned with
OECD/UNESCO standards while addressing historical inequalities.
Launch and create a sustained national effort to curate large, diverse
o
datasets in AI-ready formats. Ensure inclusive stakeholder
participation from diverse communities in the design and deployment
of AI systems. Prioritize data availability by taking measures to make
available large data sets from public sources for the training of AI
models.
Page 66 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 69
To ensure effective promotion of cultural values, broaden stakeholder
o
engagement beyond policy to include key areas across the AI
lifecycle. This means including people in the integration and transition
to AI-powered services by incorporating feedback mechanisms into AI
applications – to provide update mechanisms based on lessons learned.
Develop AI tools to digitize and preserve indigenous languages, art,
music, and literature. Embed AI heritage preservation as a priority.
Leverage AI for real-time language translation to overcome
o
communication barriers across the country’s 12 official languages. And
collaborate with tertiary institutions and startups to create AI tools that
reflect South Africa’s cultural heritage and human-centred needs.
Also promote the development of AI solutions to address rural
development, improve healthcare in underserved regions, and enhance
education in local languages.
Ubuntu as a beacon and a lens: The African philosophy on
o
interdependence, community, and shared responsibility, provides the
guide for AI policy in respect for human dignity, fairness, and social
equity. In that way, AI systems would bring benefits to society at large
while ensuring that ethical considerations such as transparency,
reduction of bias, and accountability are at the core. As a result, AI
should serve the common good, respect diversity, and promote the wellbeing of all.
Support research into language models which support underserved
o
African languages as a strategic and cultural imperative. Make it
reasonably easy for developers of models to access content which is
held by the public broadcast entities as well as other public
sources, without burdening these entities and sources. And establish
awards and grants to support AI initiatives that advance cultural and
heritage preservation, social equality, and human well-being.
Page 67 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

70 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
9.5.2 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 2: Global Collaboration and
Competitiveness
Aim: To position South Africa as a regional AI leader.
South Africa would build AI research facilities and partnerships with sub-Saharan
and other continental partners. This involves the creation of several AI hubs in South
Africa, such as those at the University of Johannesburg (UJ), Tshwane University of
Technology (TUT), Central University of Technology (CUT), and a military-focused
hub at Stellenbosch University. These hubs will enable innovation in industries such
as agriculture, healthcare, finance, and defence. The policy is in alignment with global
frameworks like the UN's Global Digital Compact and Governing AI for Humanity
efforts. The vision is to harmonize governance structures based on international best
practices and make systems interoperable and supply cross-border data flows.
Benchmarking with international frameworks like the EU's GDPR for data protection
standards is included.
Public-private partnerships are key to the facilitation of AI innovation globally. South
Africa would collaborate with other nations regarding data sharing as well as
computation power to accelerate regional development. There is a focus on also
ensuring that wages for local labour in the AI sector employed by foreign companies
are reasonable through affirmative action by the government. A Data Justice strategy
is being proposed as a model for AI regulation, with an emphasis on economic and
environmental impact and human rights. This would entail using similar principles to
the European Union's Digital Services Act by making platform distributors perform risk
assessments and report separately on their performance.
By combining these strategies in its national policy, South Africa hopes to drive
maximum international collaborations while defending local interests amid an evolving
digital economy landscape.
9.5.2.1 Policy Interventions
Foster AI research hubs and international collaborations with subo
Saharan and other continental partners. Create partnerships to
facilitate the sharing of data and computing resources, ensuring that
Page 68 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 71
AI development benefits the region. Promote AI innovation through
public-private partnerships and global alliances. Because the purpose
is to integrate AI into the economy, government would rely on private
and public entities (locally and abroad) in the development, usage
and advancement of AI systems – and in obtaining feedback which
could lead to new iterations of policy, regulations and regulatory
approaches for realising the objective of this Policy.
Operate in concert with the UN’s Global Digital Compact and
o
Governing AI for Humanity initiatives. Regulation would be aligned with
international standards (such as the EU’s GDPR – as a model) through
smart implementation techniques. Apply the provisions of the European
Union’s Digital Services Act which puts the onus on platform
distributors to conduct risk assessments, develop mitigations, and report
on their related performance for an independent audit.
Align and harmonize governance structures with global standards
o
and Africa-wide strategies (including AU’s Digital Transformation
Strategy, Continental AI Strategy, African Continental Free Trade
Area, AU Agenda 2063, among others). This would help with
interoperability of systems and cross-border data flows. This alignment
and harmonization should be kept agile (the local standards as
benchmarked against global standards should be reasonably
considered legal and enforceable, even as they change internationally).
Encourage partnerships to develop federated African cloud / data
platforms to enable shared AI resources across Africa for sovereignty
and resilience.
Adopt a Data Justice approach, which accounts for economic and
o
environmental impacts as a possible framework for AI governance. This
approach requires that as much as local players are bound by local rules,
also the multinationals (who are often not subject to local taxation) would
be subject to specific rules related to first, second, third and other
generation rights violations. Ensure equitable wages for South African
Page 69 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

72 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
workers in the AI sector who work for foreign / multinational employers.
This requires government to take an active role to protect the rights of
virtual and digital workers across the AI value chain, ensuring fair
compensation, psychological care and fostering labour regulations that
reflect the evolving nature of work in the digital economy.
Review the trade and investment cooperation frameworks to ensure
o
that AI contributes to new market opportunities, facilitates cross-border
innovation, and strengthens Africa’s collective competitiveness.
Investment in AI-related infrastructure will be pursued to reinforce South
Africa’s position as a hub for AI-driven trade, industrial development, and
consumer protection.
9.6 Strategic Pillar (SP) 6: Human-Centred Deployment
9.6.1 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 1: Human Control of Technology
(Human-Centred Approach in AI Systems)
Aim: To maintain human oversight over AI.
The AI policy is focused on incorporating human control [Human-in-the-Loop
(HITL)] into key decision-making processes of AI, especially in Generative AI. The
strategy employs reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) so that AI
systems are aligned with ethical requirements and societal norms. Through
embedding human inputs into every aspect of AI system development, South Africa
seeks to develop more transparent, accountable, and ethically sound AI applications.
HITL has human intervention at every stage of development of the AI system, right
from data labelling to model validation and continuous feedback loops. There needs
to be predetermined points of human intervention even in riskiest areas to maintain
security and liability. Safety-critical systems need to utilize inherent safety features that
put the systems into under-human-command state always, avoiding unintended
effects by virtue of completely autonomous decision-making. Decision-making
architectures place greater importance on human judgment than AI-generated
decisions, particularly in essential government functions where responsibility is
essential.
Page 70 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 73
Ethical concerns form the core of HITL systems. Human Rights Impact
Assessments will regularly be performed on AI systems to analyse their effects on
society. The non-maleficence principle: do no harm, is central to steering the
development and application of safe and positive AI technologies for individuals and
society. Through the incorporation of these components into HITL systems, South
Africa aims to develop more ethical, transparent, and accountable AI solutions in
different industries. Not only does this build greater trust among citizens but also
serves the country's overall objective of using technology to drive economic
development without subjecting itself to potential risks of its application.
Constitutional values and public interest must always guide AI deployment. This
entails conducting Human Rights Impact Assessments in all public-sector AI
deployments, ensuring that rights are respected at every stage of design and
implementation. Citizens would be central to deployment, with participatory design and
engagement mechanisms embedded in government AI systems. To reinforce
accountability, transparency standards such as explainability and traceability would be
mandatory in public-facing applications. South Africa would also leverage public–
private partnerships to digitise government records and services, ensuring resilience
and efficiency. Finally, priority would be given to AI applications that directly improve
service delivery in critical domains such as health, education, agriculture, industry,
public safety and justice.
9.6.1.1 Policy Interventions
Human-in-the-Loop Systems (HITL): Ensure that critical AI decisions
o
involve human oversight (especially in Generative AI). This includes the
use of reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF). Apply the
Human-in-the-Loop approach, ensuring oversight at all development
stages. With specific thresholds for human intervention, even for highrisk areas.
Develop frameworks for AI decision-making that prioritize human
o
judgment. AI should not replace human decision-making, particularly in
critical government functions. Critical systems should include built-in
Page 71 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

74 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
safety brakes and remain under human control always. Ensure that
consumers have the option to engage with humans instead of AI
systems where feasible.
Apply the principle of non-maleficence whereby AI should not harm
o
individuals, society, or the environment. And conduct Human Rights
Impact Assessments on AI systems, including all government-related
systems. Further, conduct regular study of acceptable thresholds for
the application of human oversight and intervention, publish and update
accordingly.
9.6.2 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 2: Transparency & Sufficient
Explainability
Aim: To build public trust in AI (using AI within wider systems that are responsible
and accountable to the public)
The national AI policy focuses on the creation of explainable AI systems that deliver
clear, interpretable outputs. This is important for trust and acceptance by users,
especially in high-risk applications such as credit scoring. By making decisions by AI
systems comprehensible and contestable, trust and accountability are improved, and
developers are made accountable for their results. Explainability allows one to
understand how and why an AI arrives at a decision, creating the platform through
which decisions made by AI can be challenged by stakeholders in the appropriate
forums. Risk-based specifications make developers accountable without unfairly
burdening lower-risk applications. Mechanisms must be established through which
citizens may grasp high-risk systems without overwhelming less mission-critical ones.
Knowing how high-risk AI algorithms operate enables the detection and prevention
of biases. This includes ensuring transparency by employing strategies such as
POPIA's Section 71 on automated decision-making. Routine algorithm impact
assessments enable impacts on society to be assessed while advancing algorithmic
transparency. Transparency is defined as the public operation of AI systems, where
processes are visible to users. Governance frameworks must ensure transparency
Page 72 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 75
through offering visibility of model operation and possible effects. Foreign suppliers
must be aligned with local accountability, with institutions obligated to inform
individuals when affected by AI decision-making.
Public campaigns shall make citizens more aware of AI technology implications.
Research will also address ethical implications in the scenario of content moderation
by AI to curb misinformation.
9.6.2.1 Policy Interventions
Sufficiently Explainable AI: Promote the development of systems
o
around AI that provide clear, understandable outputs (related to the
ability to understand and interpret how AI systems arrive at their
decisions or conclusions). Use the principle of “sufficient
explainability.”
▪ Trust and Acceptance: Users and stakeholders are more likely
to trust and accept AI systems, especially in high-stakes
applications, such as credit scoring, if they can understand
how decisions are made. While trust and acceptance are high
ideals, it will be important to create an environment where users
and stakeholders are able to challenge decisions made using AI
systems through appropriate fora. AI systems must include
mechanisms for citizen understanding and trust, especially
regarding high-risk systems. This would be done without imposing
an unnecessary burden on less risky applications. Ensure that
citizens have information on how to check and verify the criteria
listed by AI tools organisations.
▪ Bias Detection and Mitigation: Take appropriate measures for
detecting and mitigating, because understanding how high-risk
AI algorithms make decisions allows for the detection and
mitigation of biases that could have significant consequences.
Page 73 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

76 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
Biases can unintentionally be amplified in AI systems due to
skewed training data or inherent biases in algorithms.
▪ Accountability: Risk-based requirements for explainability
enables and mandates developers and organizations to be
accountable for the actions and outcomes of organisation
systems including AI. Accountability is mandatory.
OPTION: A clear licensing requirement (with standards
o
bodies) for the deployment of high-risk AI applications.
▪ AI developers must provide clear, understandable outputs for
affected individuals, ensuring that automated decisions are
lawful, fair and challengeable. Automated systems must allow
affected individuals to understand how decisions are made
and challenge unfavourable outcomes.
Sufficient Transparency: This refers to the clear and open operation of
o
AI systems, ensuring that their processes, decision-making criteria, and
outcomes are understandable and accessible to users and
stakeholders, including insights into model functionality, data usage,
decision logic, and potential impacts. Increase transparency through
governance systems and ensuring publicly available information. Use
the principle of “sufficient transparency.”
▪ Because advanced and sensitive systems may have less
transparent decision-making processes (i.e., “black box”
scenarios), South Africa should carefully select use cases
which require regulatory oversight (and not reject every
system which does not have transparent processes). Implement
frequent algorithm impact assessments and algorithmic bias
testing to evaluate the societal effects of AI systems. Facilitate
appropriate levels of algorithm transparency. Educate the public
on AI technologies and their implications. Explainable AI provides
insights into how models behave in different scenarios, which can
Page 74 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 77
lead to improvements in model performance, efficiency, and
usability.
▪ Require foreign-based AI providers and systems to meet local
accountability standards. Require organizations to provide
plain language notifications to individuals when AI systems
impact them. Apply POPIA’s Section 71 on automated decisionmaking as a useful tool for ensuring explainability and
transparency. Link this policy to the Copyright Amendment Bill
/ Act.
9.6.3 Strategic Building Block (SBB) 3: Public Sector Implementation
Aim: To enhance government efficiency through AI.
South Africa will embrace AI in public administration for the sake of maximizing
state governance and delivery of services. The use of AI tools such as planning tools,
predictive analytics, and chatbots is employed for efficiency enhancement. Pilot testing
AI policies and guidelines to create risks prior to extending them across all is in the
plan. Ethical directives in the implementation of AI are key to ensuring public officials
learn about how to use these technologies. A whole-of-government strategy is
recommended, based on values such as Batho Pele, consistent with current legislation
that applies to the public service. Rewards will be given for exploration of distinctive
public-sector issues. Continuous AI Maturity Assessment Indexing will be utilized to
track developments. Openness of AI acquisition is highlighted, with bias stress-testing
and emphasis on explainability and accountability within public-sector systems.
AI shall be the key factor to facilitate alignment of value creation within the
government ministries through data-driven policymaking in asset redistribution, capital
mobilization for all, optimized supply chain performance for MSMEs, and intelligent
land allocation. Pilot applications will be introduced in healthcare (diagnosis by
prediction), education (individual learning platforms), urban planning (intelligent traffic
management), and national security. Citizen participation platforms will be created for
receiving feedback on public service deployment of AI.
Page 75 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

78 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
9.6.3.1 Policy Interventions
Utilize public administration in an entrepreneurial manner to test
o
and pilot the use of AI for purposes of transitioning society towards techreadiness. Also, for pilot testing of AI policies and frameworks to identify
risks and refine strategies before widescale adoption. Utilize a Wholeof-Government Approach, guided by principles such as Batho Pele
and tethered to all other laws and regulations which govern the public
service. The design and deployment of AI in the public service must
exhibit the principles of Batho Pele.
AI in Administration: Implement AI in accountable and traceable
o
systems to optimize state management and service delivery. This
includes the use of chatbots, predictive analytics and planning tools
based on AI. Incentivise AI research aimed at addressing unique
public-sector challenges and creating targeted solutions. Treat
behaviour-change and digitalisation as essential sub-pillars – as
part of the implementation of AI in the public sector. Deploy and apply AI
to play a critical role in coordinating public value creation across
government, public and private sectors.
Establish a National AI Social Compact for Human-Centred AI
o
addressing socio-economic repercussions: Enhance public sector
digital capacity development – including human capital development,
data sovereignty measures, infrastructure, local manufacturing, local
development, ethical development, deployment and usage. Also enable
public institutions and employees to actively ensure AI and digital
readiness at every level of society.
Guidelines and Standards: Develop guidelines for ethical and effective
o
AI deployment in government operations. Ensure training of public
servants in the usage of AI. Foster public transparency regarding AI
procurement and stress-testing for bias, holding public-sector AI
systems to a higher standard of explainability and accountability.
Page 76 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 79
Engage citizens actively in shaping public-sector AI systems. And
introduce and fund regular AI Maturity Assessment Indexing.
In pursuit of the objectives of the country, use AI for the effective
o
distribution of productive assets – including driving efficiency through
(and for):
▪ Data-Driven Policy for Asset Redistribution
▪ Democratizing Access to Capital
▪ Smart Land and Resource Allocation
▪ AI-Enabled Skills Development
▪ Optimizing Supply Chains for Small Businesses
▪ AI for Cooperative-Based Production Models, and
▪ Automated Legal & Administrative Support
Create integrated, data-powered infrastructure, centres and systems
o
for monitoring and increasing the efficiency levels of all service
delivery (and related) touchpoints in each sector of government and
society. Launch pilot projects in key areas such as healthcare (e.g.,
predictive diagnostics), education (e.g., personalised learning tools), and
urban planning (e.g., smart traffic management). Establish platforms for
community input and feedback on AI applications in public services to
build trust and ensure alignment with societal needs.
Page 77 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

80 No. 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
10. Conclusion
This policy's vision is of AI for inclusive economic growth, job creation, cost reduction,
and a developing Africa. Therefore, as the policy leads to sector-based strategies, every
sector must express measurable targets assigned to responsible institutions, with a
linked budget.
This policy represents a strategic blueprint aimed at harnessing AI technologies to
propel the country's economic growth, technological advancement, and societal wellbeing. Emphasizing ethical development, the policy prioritizes the responsible
deployment of AI that aligns with South Africa's values and priorities. By focusing on
ethical guidelines, the policy aims to ensure that AI systems are developed and
implemented with considerations for fairness, accountability, transparency, and
inclusivity. This approach not only fosters trust among citizens and stakeholders but
also mitigates potential risks such as bias and discrimination in AI applications. This
policy lays a foundation upon which various sectors may develop their own
implementation strategies.
In addition to ethical considerations, the policy outlines key pillars such as robust data
governance frameworks, infrastructure enhancement, and significant investments in
research and innovation. These pillars are crucial for creating an enabling environment
where AI technologies can thrive and contribute meaningfully to sectors such as
healthcare, agriculture, education, and public safety. By promoting human-centric AI
solutions, the policy aims to prioritize the needs and well-being of South Africans,
ensuring that AI advancements lead to tangible improvements in quality of life and
societal progress. Overall, the policy lays the groundwork for South Africa to emerge
as a leader in AI innovation while addressing challenges and opportunities in a holistic
and sustainable manner.
Page 78 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 81
11. References
1. Academy of Science of South Africa. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National
Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
2. Acemoglu, D. & Restrepo, R. (2018). Artificial Intelligence, Automation and
Work. National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w24196/w24196.pdf
3. Arias, C.R. (2022). An Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. SPU Works. 173.
https://digitalcommons.spu.edu/works/173
4. Association for Savings and Investment South Africa. (2024). Inputs to the
South Africa National Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
5. Babatunde, O., & Mnguni, P. (2023). "Challenges and Opportunities in
Regulating AI: Perspectives from South Africa." AI Policy Journal, 2(3), 143156.
6. Banking Association of South Africa. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National
Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
7. Bowmans South Africa. (2024). "South Africa’s AI Policy Framework and
Regulatory Considerations." Business Day.
8. Brynjolfsson, E. & McAfee, A. (2017). The Business of Artificial Intelligence.
https://hbr.org/2017/07/the-business-of-artificial-intelligence
9. Burman, A., & Sewpersadh, K. (2022). "Legal Frameworks for AI in South
Africa: Balancing Innovation and Accountability." South African Journal of
Philosophy, 41(2), 207-217.
10. Cavaliere, F., McGregor, R., & Hersh, M. (2022). "Artificial Intelligence and
Ethics in Emerging Economies: The Case of South Africa." AI & Society, 37(4),
565-583.
Page 79 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

82 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
11. Centre for AI Research. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
12. City of Cape Town. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
13. Clickatell. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence Policy
Framework
14. Department of Trade, Industry and Competition. (2025). Inputs to the South
Africa National Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
15. Engage to Inspire International. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National
Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
16. El Hadi, M. M. (2023). Artificial Intelligence Background, Definitions, Challenges
and Benefits.
https://jstc.journals.ekb.eg/article_297957_18c63823bf45bdd85ffd54bf0dafa8f
5.pdf
17. Ernst & Young. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
18. ESKOM. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence Policy
Framework
19. Etale, A. E., & Naidoo, P. (2021). "Accountability and Transparency in African
AI Policies: Lessons from South Africa." African Journal of Public Affairs, 9(1),
39-52.
20. European Commission. (2020). White Paper on Artificial Intelligence - A
European approach to excellence and trust. Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu
Page 80 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 83
21. Fairbridges Wertheim Becker. (2024). "AI in the Rainbow Nation: South Africa’s
Evolving Policy Arc."
22. Fourie, I., & Botha, A. (2021). "AI Ethics in South Africa: Implications for Trust
and Fairness in AI." African Journal of Science, Technology, Innovation and
Development, 13(5), 677-688.
23. Global Policy Partners. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
24. Goodfellow, I., Yoshua, B., & Aaron, C. (2017). Machine Learning Basics.
https://www.deeplearningbook.org/contents/ml.html
25. GSM Association. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
26. Huawei Technologies South Africa. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National
Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
27. Human Rights Watch. (2022). "Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights in
Africa." IT-Online. (2024). "South Africa’s AI Policy Framework and Ethical
Imperatives."
28. Information Regulator of South Africa. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa
National Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
29. Inayatullah, S. (2023). The Futures Triangle: Origins and Iterations. World
Futures Review, 15(2-4), 112-121.
https://doi.org/10.1177/19467567231203162
30. ISO/IEC 20546:2019. Information technology — Artificial intelligence —
Concepts and terminology. International Organization for Standardization
Page 81 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

84 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
31. Janiesch, C., Zschech, P., & Heinrich, K. (2021). Machine Learning and Deep
Learning. Electronic Markets. 31. 10.1007/s12525-021-00475-2.
32. Jayanth, A. B., Harish, R. D. S., & Binoy, N. (2017). Machine Learning
Approaches to Electricity Consumption Forecasting in Automated Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) Systems: An Empirical Study. 254-263. 10.1007/978-3319-57264-2_26.
33. Karr, V., & Smith, L. (2023). "Digital Rights and AI Governance in Africa: A
Focus on Ethical and Legal Challenges." Journal of African Law, 67(1), 95-108.
34. Kaspersky. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
35. Kostin, K. B. (2018). Foresight of the Global Digital Trends. Strategic
Management. 23(1), pp11–19. DOI: 10.5937/StraMan1801011K
36. Law Innovation Technology Tomorrow Institute. (2024). Inputs to the South
Africa National Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
37. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature 521, pp 436–
444. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
38. Leijnen, S. & van Veen, F. (2020). The Neural Network Zoo. Proceedings 2020,
47(1), 9; https://doi.org/10.3390/proceedings2020047009
39. Madani, A., Arnaout, R., Mofrad, M. et al. (2018). Fast and Accurate View
Classification of Echocardiograms Using Deep Learning. Digital Med 1(6).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-017-0013-1
40. Manyika, V. J., Chui, M., Bisson, Merimadi, M., Bughin, J., George, K. Willmott,
P., & Dewhurst, M. (2017). A Future that Works: Automation, Employment, and
Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute. https://www.mckinsey.com/featuredPage 82 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT,10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 85
insights/digital-disruption/harnessing-automation-for-a-future-that-works/deDE#/
41. Microsoft SA. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
42. Mohammad, S.M. (2020). Artificial Intelligence in Information Technology.
International Journal of Innovations in Engineering Research and Technology
[IJIERT]. ISSN: 2394-3696. Vol 7(6). 2020.
43. Naidoo, K. (2020). Innovation, Digital Platform Technologies and Employment:
An Overview of Key Issues and Emerging Trends in South Africa. SCIS Working
Paper | Number 9.
https://wiredspace.wits.ac.za/server/api/core/bitstreams/3261074e-310b4913-ab88-48e8fb213712/content
44. National Advisory Council on Innovations. (2025). Recommendations Towards
the Development of a National Artificial Intelligence Strategy for South Africa.
Department of Science, Technology and Innovation
45. NXCA Network. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
46. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (n.d.).
Human centred values and principles for artificial intelligence. Retrieved from
https://www.oecd.org
47. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2019).
OECD Principles on Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org.
48. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2020). Artificial
Intelligence: How can we ensure that AI benefits society as a whole?
https://www.oecd.org/digital/artificial-intelligence/
Page 83 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

86 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
49. Phamane, N. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
50. Pienaar, H. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
51. Presidential Commission on Fourth Industrial Revolution. (2020). The
Diagnostic Report. https://www.gov.za/documents/report-presidentialcommission-4th-industrial-revolution-23-oct-2020-0000
52. Pretorius, D., Ongeso, J. P., Franklyn, C., & Valodia, A. (2024). "Deep Dive into
South Africa’s AI Policy Framework." IT-Online.
53. Rudin, C. (2019). Stop Explaining Black Box Machine Learning Models for High
Stakes Decisions and Use Interpretable Models Instead. Nat Mach Intell 1, pp
206–215. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0048-x
54. Russel, S. & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Third
Edition. Prentice Hall Series.
55. Scholarly Horizon. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
56. Smith, M., & Mahomed, R. (2021). "The Impact of AI on Social Justice in South
Africa." Journal of Ethics and Social Philosophy, 18(3), 313-329.
57. Shrestha, P. (2021). Application of Machine Learning and Deep Learning
Techniques for Nepal Stock Market Price Prediction.
10.13140/RG.2.2.11794.38085.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353634645_Application_of_Machine
_Learning_and_Deep_Learning_Techniques_for_Nepal_stock_market_price_
prediction/citation/download
Page 84 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

STAATSKOERANT, 10 ApRil 2026 No. 54477 87
58. South African Insurance Association. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National
Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
59. Tech Hive Advisory Africa. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
60. TechJins. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence Policy
Framework
61. The Ethics Institute. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial
Intelligence Policy Framework
62. United Nations. (2023). Generative Artificial Intelligence: What it is, What it is
not and What it can be for the United Nations. https://www.un.org/en/unchronicle/generative-artificial-intelligence-what-it-what-it-not-and-what-it-canbe-united
63. University of Pretoria Centre for Child Law. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa
National Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
64. University of the Western Cape IT Society. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa
National Artificial Intelligence Policy Framework
65. Walstra, K. (2024). Inputs to the South Africa National Artificial Intelligence
Policy Framework
66. World Bank. (2023). Artificial Intelligence in the Public Sector.
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/746721616045333426/pdf/Artifi
cial-Intelligence-in-the-Public-Sector-Summary-Note.pdf
67. Zhang, L., Wang, S. & Liu, B. (2018). Deep Learning for Sentiment Analysis: A
Survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery. 8. 10.1002/widm.1253.
Page 85 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za

88 No . 54477 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 10 ApRil 2026
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322694910_Deep_Learning_for_Se
ntiment_Analysis_A_Survey
Page 86 of 86
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za