An Integrated, Prosperous
and Peaceful Africa.
THE DIGITAL
TRANSFORMATION
STRATEGY FOR
AFRICA
2020-2030
TABLE OF CONTENT
I. INTRODUCTION 3
II. VISION AND OBJECTIVES 4
III. SWOT ANALYSIS 6
IV. DEVELOPING THE STRENGTHS AND
ADDRESSING THE WEAKNESSES 7
V. RESPONDING TO THE OPPORTUNITIES
AND MANAGING THE THREATS 7
VI. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 8
VII. FOUNDATION PILLARS 11
VIII. CRITICAL SECTORS TO DRIVE
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 30
IX. CROSS CUTTING THEMES 47
X. STRATEGIC ENABLERS 61
THE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION STRATEGY
FOR AFRICA (2020–2030)
An Integrated and inclusive digital society and economy in
Africa that improves the quality of life for Africans.
BACKGROUND
Digital Transformation is a driving force for innovative, inclusive and sustainable growth.
African countries, in seeking to further reap the benefits that accompany digital transformation,
are taking major strides towards prioritising and accelerating meaningful digitisation. It is on
this basis that the African Union (AU) developed the Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa
to not only provide a common and coordinated guide to enable African leaders to reap the
benefits of digital transformation, but to also help mitigate the risks that might accompany
these developments. The strategy builds upon existing initiatives and frameworks in Africa
and bring together key players in the ICT sector across Africa to achieve its objectives.
A DIGITALLY TRANSFORMED CONTINENT
FOR PROSPERITY AND INCLUSIVITY
Cyber security,
Digital content & Emerging Research &
Cross Cutting applications Digital ID technologies privacy & personal development
Themes data protection
Critical sectors Digital Industry Digital Trade & Digital Digital Digital Health Digital
to drive digital financial services Governance Education Agriculture
transformation
Enabling environment, Digital Skills & Digital innovation &
Foundation policy and regulation Digital Infrastructure Human Capacity entrepreneurship
Pillars
STRATEGY AT A GLANCE
The main objectives of the Digital Transformation Strategy are to harness digital technologies
and innovation to transform African societies and economies to promote Africa‘s integration,
generate inclusive economic growth, stimulate job creation, break digital divides, and eradi-
cate poverty. As such, the strategy aims to support not only the continent’s socio-economic
development, but to ensure Africa’s ownership of modern tools of digital management.
Most importantly, the strategy seeks to leverage the strengths and address the current lack
of a common digital coordination framework within Africa. It will provide a common, coordi-
nated digitalization agenda, enhance synergies and avoid the duplication of efforts. The AU
Commission will also develop and implement a communication strategy aimed at the public
sector, private sector and citizens to ensure not only relevant buy-in from the public sector,
but to also promote and raise awareness about the importance and significant potential of
digital transformation for Africa and Africans.
SUCCESS FACTORS OF THE DTS
Achieving digital transformation in Africa requires political commitment at the highest level,
private sector & civil society engagement, aligning of policies and sector regulation and a
massive scaling-up of investment and dedication of resources towards the foundation pillars
and critical sectors for digital transformation. Moreover, the strategy calls for the need for
regional integration and international cooperation, mutual recognition and harmonization of
existing digitalization initiatives, projects, and systems in addition to the promotion of new
initiatives for its successful implementation. Capacity development, advocacy and awaren-
ess, and monitoring and evaluation framework are also important factors for its successful
implementation.
3
I. INTRODUCTION
Africa presents a sea of economic opportunities in virtually every sector, and the con-
tinent’s youthful population structure is an enormous opportunity in this digital era and
hence the need for Africa to make digitally enabled socio-economic development a high
priority. Digital Transformation is a driving force for innovative, inclusive and sustainable
growth. Innovations and digitalization are stimulating job creation and contributing to
addressing poverty, reducing inequality, facilitating the delivery of goods and services, and
contributing to the achievement of Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Furthermore, Africa has fewer legacy challenges to deal with and is therefore adopting
digitized solutions faster out of necessity. For Africa, the current moment offers a leapfrog-
ging opportunity. Today’s technologies indicate the scale and speed at which technology is
transforming traditional socio- economic sectors.
Recognizing the efforts of the continent’s leadership to prioritize and accelerate digital
transformation, and building on the vision of many African leaders, African countries are
ready for a comprehensive digital transformation strategy to guide a common, coordinated
response to reap the benefits of the fourth industrial revolution.
Based on African Union Executive Council Decisions related to ICT1, ECA Resolution
(812 –XXXI) on the African Information Society Initiative and the Smart Africa Board
meeting held on the margins of the 32nd African Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government that highlighted the need for the ICT sector to lead the process, the AU
Commission undertook to develop a comprehensive Digital Transformation Strategy for
Africa in collaboration with the UN Economic Commission for Africa, Smart Africa, AUDA-
NEPAD, Regional Economic Communities, African Development Bank, Africa Telecom-
munications Union, Africa Capacity Building Foundation, International Telecommunication
Union and the World Bank.
The Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa will build on the existing initiatives and
frameworks such as the Policy and Regulatory Initiative for Digital Africa (PRIDA), the Pro-
gramme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA), the African Continental Free Trade
Area (AfCFTA), the African Union Financial Institutions (AUFIs, the Single African Air Trans-
port Market (SAATM); and the Free Movement of Persons (FMP) to support the develop-
ment of a Digital Single Market (DSM) for Africa, as part of the integration priorities of the
African Union. The Smart Africa Initiative has set the creation of a Digital Single Market in
Africa as its strategic vision.
1EX.CL/Dec.739(XXII), EX.CL/Dec.545(XVI), EX.CL/Dec.613(XVIII), EX.CL/Dec.835(XXV), EX.CL/Dec.987(XXXII)
4
II. VISION AND OBJECTIVES
A. VISION
An Integrated and inclusive digital society and economy in Africa that improves the quality
of life of Africa’s citizens, strengthen the existing economic sector, enable its diversifica-
tion and development, and ensure continental ownership with Africa as a producer and
not only a consumer in the global economy
B. OVERALL OBJECTIVE
To harness digital technologies and innovation to transform African societies and econo-
mies to promote Africa‘s integration, generate inclusive economic growth, stimulate job
creation, break the digital divide, and eradicate poverty for the continent’s socio-economic
development and ensure Africa’s ownership of modern tools of digital management.
C. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES TO DRIVE THE DIGITAL
TRANSFORMATION TO PROPEL INDUSTRIALIZATION IN
AFRICA AND CONTRIBUTE TO THE DIGITAL ECONOMY
AND SUPPORT AFCFTA
• Build a secured Digital Single Market in Africa by 2030 where free movement
of persons, services and capital is ensured and individuals and businesses can
seamlessly access and engage in online activities in line with Africa’s Continen-
tal Free Trade Area (AfCFTA)
• By 2030 all our people should be digitally empowered and able to access safely
and securely to at least (6 mb/s) all the time where ever they live in the conti-
nent at an affordable price of no more than (1cts usd per mb) through a smart
device manufactured in the continent at the price of no more than (100 usd) to
benefit from all basic e-services and content of which at least 30% is develo-
ped and hosted in Africa;
• Create a harmonized environment necessary to guarantee investment and
financing by setting up a digital sovereignty fund in order to close the digital
infrastructure gap and achieve an accessible, affordable and secure broadband,
across demography, gender, and geography;
5
• Harmonize policies, legislations and regulations and establish and improve
digital networks and services with a view to strengthening intra-Africa trade,
intra-investment and capital flows and the socio-economic integration of the
continent, while maintaining a relational balance with other continents in the
context of networked economies (Digital economy, collaborative economy)
• Implement laws, policies and regulations required to stimulate and accelerate
digital transformation for national, regional and continental development;
• Enable the coherence of existing and future digital policies and strategies at re-
gional and national levels and mobilize effective cooperation between institutions;
• Entry into force of the African Union convention on Cyber Security and Personal
Data Protection by 2020 and for all Members States to adopt a complete set
of legislation covering e- Transactions, Personal Data Protection and Privacy,
Cybercrime and Consumer Protection;
• Promote open standards and interoperability for cross-border trust framework,
personal data protection and privacy;
• Create awareness and counterbalance issues of Cyber Security and Personal
Data Protection and Privacy;
• Promote the management and use of Country Codes Top Level Domains as
they are critical national resources whilst ensuring that technical and administ-
rative operations are at international standards to foster trust and use of African
Domain Names in order to bring financial, economic and sociocultural benefits
to Africa;
• Build inclusive digital skills and human capacity across the digital sciences,
judiciary, and education, both technical and vocational, to lead and power digital
transformation including coding, programming, analysis, security, block chain,
machine learning, artificial intelligence, robotics, engineering, innovation, entre-
preneurship, and technology policy & regulation;
• Offer a massive online e-skills development program to provide basic know-
ledge and skills in security and privacy in digital environment to 100 million
Africans a year by 2021 and 300 million per year by 2025. „
• Foster the policies that create an enabling environment for productive digital
trade and digital payment systems to advance opportunities for digital work, fair
competition for digital businesses, and contribute to an advantageous position
of Africa in the global digital economy;
• Support the Agenda 2063 flagship Pan-African E-network services programme
through providing policies and strategies that lead to transformative e-applica-
tions and services thereby making the digital revolution the basis for service
delivery and ultimately transform Africa into a Digital Society. Language barriers
and time zones for e-learning and telepresence component of the Pan-African
e-Network to be removed.
• Build a vibrant sector approach to digitalization of the agriculture, health and
education sectors
• 99.9% of people in Africa to have a digital legal identity as part of a civil regis-
tration process by 2030 to make African citizens, enlightened and responsible
e-citizens.
6
III. SWOT ANALYSIS
A SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis is conducted to better
assess the internal strengths and weaknesses, as well as the external opportunities and
threats of a digital transformation strategy for Africa.
STRENGTH WEAKNESS
• M omentum is gaining for a digital strategy • Weak coordination among continental institutions
for Africa. pursuing the digitalization agenda of the continent.
This deficiency must be addressed immediately,
• M ost AU Member States have developed ICT
otherwise the project is already destined to fail even
policies
before being implemented.
• Work has already been done with national
• Low cohesion, cooperation, coordination and har-
governments to identify and address barriers to
monization among regional and continental actors
harmonization of laws and regulations in various
sectors. • Limited policy and regulatory reforms to facilitate
the interconnection of networks across borders,
• M obile phone availability and becoming
including national and commercial backbones, or
more affordable
supervisory frameworks for data protection, data
• Sustainability of growth of Internet storage/processing/handling.
• Shortage of finance, mentoring, and training
available for high potential digital entrepreneurs
• Weak framework and mechanism for monitoring
and evaluating the implementation of the strategy
• Technology is supposed to be a tool that empowers,
especially those who are on the bottom of the pyr-
amid, but the cost for access to internet is inhibitive
S W
O T
OPPORTUNITY THREATS
• T here is a space to establish a continental • W eak coordination makes it difficult for AUC, Smart
coordination framework for the digital agenda Africa, AUDA-NEPAD, ATU, and UNECA to optimize
of Africa. resources for effective and efficient delivery of the
digital agenda for the continent
• There is international recognition to improve
effectiveness of law- making bodies and regula- • Limited supervisory capacity to identify and
tory agencies with capacity building efforts for mitigate risks which are exacerbated by digital
digital transformation. technologies, including cyber-attacks, fraud, and
over- indebtedness.
• There is an opportunity for a regional harmoniza-
tion or cross- border systems for payments, cross • There is a gender gap in mobile access and usage.
border trade, identification and verification for Failure to address this could result in greater in-
digital transactions. equality for women across the continent
• O pportunities for digital transformation to • Challenges related to FinTech-Cybersecurity, crypto
revolutionize the African financial sector currencies, etc.
• O nboarding the 200 million currently without • There is an increasing gap between the haves that
internet access would result in significant gains in are demanding latest technology and the have nots
GDP, economic productivity and gender equality that cannot afford that latest technology
• O pportunity to address the growing digital
divide in Africa
7
IV. DEVELOPING THE STRENGTHS AND
ADDRESSING THE WEAKNESSES
To leverage the strengths and address the current lack of a common digital coordination
framework, the AU Commission is coordinating the development and formulation of the
Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa to guide a common, coordinated digitalization
agenda, enhance synergies and avoid duplication of effort.
The AU Commission will also develop and implement a communications strategy (inclu-
ding conferences, workshops) towards the public sector, private sector and citizens to
ensure the following: buy-in of the public sector to the digital strategy, and to promote the
importance of digital transformation;
• provision of up-to-date information on progress and how the private sector
can contribute, and
• communicate the benefits of integration, and foster trust in digital services
to the AU citizens
• Recommend the set-up of regulation observatories andcompetition
oversight bodies and economic conflicts settlement mechanisms.
V. RESPONDING TO THE OPPORTUNITIES
AND MANAGING THE THREATS
To respond to the opportunities and manage the threats, the AU Commission will work on
a continental branding to promote the digital strategy and attract FDI and venture capital.
The Commission in collaboration with other Continental Institutions and Regional Econo-
mic Communities will work with Member States to identify and address barriers to har-
monization of laws and regulations and drive leadership for necessary reforms that ensure
future investment in digital transformation.
8
VI. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa has been developed using the following
approach:
a. Informed by previous initiatives and documents: The strategy takes into account
the broad and diverse range of previous activities, initiatives, directions and
mandates at the continental level.
b. Collaborative/Multi-stakeholder: The AU Commission developed the draft
strategy in collaboration with the UN Economic Commission for Africa, Smart
Africa, AUDA-NEPAD, Regional Economic Communities, African Development
Bank, Africa Telecommunications Union, Africa Capacity Building Fund, Inter-
national Telecommunication Union, World Bank and other partner institutions. In
addition, input and consultations with the private sector and civil society were
sought. AU Member States then validated the draft strategy with amendments.
From the conceptual to the practical: From Foundational Elements, to Analysis, to Pa-
thways to Transformation, from there to Strategies to Unlock the Pathways, and finally
Tools for Success.
FROM THE CONCEPTUAL TO THE PRACTICAL
A Digitally Transformed Continent
for Prosperity and Inclusivity
Digital content & Digital Emerging Cyber security, privacy & Research &
applications ID technologies personal data protection development
CROSS CUTTING THEMES
Digital Digital Trade & Digital Digital Digital Digital
Industry financial services Governance Education Health Agriculture
CRITICAL SECTORS TO DRIVE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
Enabling environment, Digital Digital Skills & Digital innovation &
policy and regulation Infrastructure Human Capacity entrepreneurship
FOUNDATION PILLARS
9
The Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa is based on foundation pillars (Enabling
Environment, Policy and Regulation, Digital Infrastructure, Digital Skills and Human
Capacity, Digital Innovation and Entrepreneurship), critical sectors( Digital Industry, Digital
Trade and Financial Services, Digital Government, Digital Education, Digital Health, Digital
Agriculture) to drive the digital transformation and cross cutting themes (Digital Content &
Applications, Digital ID, Emerging Technologies, Cybersecurity, Privacy and Personal Data
Protection, Research and Development) to support the digital ecosystem. It will also in-
clude policy recommendations and actions under each foundational pillar, critical sector and
cross-cutting theme. Some of the proposed recommendations and actions include those
highlighted in the AU-EU Digital Economy taskforce report. The strategy is further guided
by the following principles;
10
(I) SOLIDARITY AND COOPERATION:
Solidarity between African Union Member States; Cooperation between the AUC, RECs,
African Institutions and International organizations; and Linked to Agenda 2063 and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
(II) COMPREHENSIVE:
Adopting an ecosystem approach that avoids a silo approach and is comprehensive in
defining and applying the requisite elements and foundations for digital transformation;
(III)TRANSFORMATIVE:
Fully leverage, harness and accelerate impact on society by accelerating Africa’s
socio-economic development through digital transformation;
(IV) INCLUSIVE:
Digital Transformation for everyone, everywhere across Africa, that is affordable and
ubiquitous, creating equal access to opportunities and mitigating risks of exclusion;
(V) HOMEGROWN:
Led and owned by Africa’s Institutions, it will be embedded in Africa’s realities and unleas-
hing the African spirit of enterprise and creativity, to generate homegrown digital content
and solutions, while embracing what is good and relevant;
(VI) NEW MINDSET:
Benefitting from the digital transformation requires a mindset change and new types of
collaboration among stakeholders, and across sectors, with facilitation and retooling;
(VII) SAFE:
Society that is well informed about both the opportunities and risks arising from a digital
economy and society, and that healthy disruption to markets and business models is ensured;
11
VII. FOUNDATION PILLARS
All components of a Digital ecosystem are important, however, Foundation Pillars are tho-
se elements that are the foundations on which Digital Transformation is built, and without
which a Digital Transformation would not be stable and self-sustaining. It is also important
to recognize that a successful Digital Transformation will yield critical digital dividends across
and between many sectors.
A. ENABLING ENVIRONMENT, POLICY & REGULATION
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Realizing the vision of digital transformation for Africa requires appropriate policies and
an enabling environment with critical policy reforms to the foundation pillars and critical
sectors to drive digital transformation.
Collaborative ICT regulatory measures and tools are the new frontier for regulators and
policy makers as they work towards maximizing the opportunities afforded by digital trans-
formation across industries. Recognizing the potential of emerging technologies and the
impact that policy and regulatory frameworks can have on their success, countries and
their regulators should encourage a regulatory paradigm that pushes frontiers and enables
digital transformation.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Governments have a responsibility to create an enabling environment with policies and
regulations that promote digital transformation. Political commitment at the highest level,
ensuring stability and predictability of the policy environment, promoting sustainable envi-
ronment for the private sector to invest, adopting regulatory best practice and stimulating
demand for digital solutions are all part of the enabling environment. A conducive enabling
environment across foundation pillars and critical sectors for digital transformation is
fundamental.
Policy makers and regulators need to keep pace with advances in technology, address the
new regulatory frontiers and create the foundation upon which digital transformation can
achieve its full potential. Being prepared for digital transformation and emerging techno-
logies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), the Internet of Things (IoT), Machine to Machine
communications (M2M) and 5G is fundamental.
Public policy, Legal and regulatory frameworks need to be up-to-date, flexible, incentive-
based and market-driven to support digital transformation across sectors and across the
continent regions. The Figure below shows the status of regions in Africa with regards to
having in place relevant e-Commerce Legislation
12
SHARE OF ECONOMIES WITH RELEVANT E-COMMERCE
LEGISLATION IN AFRICA, BY REGION, 2017 (%)
E-Transactions Consumer Privacy and data Cybercrime laws
laws protection laws protection laws
100
80
60
40
20
0
Middle Africa East Africa Southern Africa West Africa North Africa
Source: OECD. 2018
Furthermore, acknowledging that the Internet is an essential tool and a dynamic force for
economic, social and cultural development, there is need for localizing Internet Gover-
nance discussions and related Public policy matters to enable, develop and support local
Internet/Digital economy.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Support the development and implementation of national, regional and continental
digital transformation strategies to stimulate demand, supply and enable scaling up
of digital initiatives to address developmental challenges affecting African continent;
• Develop and implement national and sectorial digital strategies
• Develop and implement regional and continental digital strategies
• Develop and implement cyberspace policy and legislations;
• Develop and implement data protection and privacy policy and regulation in line
with the Malabo Convention
• Develop regulation aimed at enabling free flow on non-personal data
• Establish a capacity development programme to support African policymakers,
regulators and other public sector representatives
• Design policies based on a human-centred and holistic approach that takes
into account the local context and cross-cutting issues relevant to all stages of
policy design and implementation.
• Special attention should be given to women, people living in remote areas,
people with disabilities, disadvantaged and marginalized communities through
the establishment of a platform for dialogue and social cohesion and dialogue
that involves these groups targets. The promotion of online cultural diversity
must be supported to ensure that every person participates fully in society.
• Develop and implement strategies for optimal utilization of scarce critical
resources such as spectrum and management of IP addresses including migra-
tion to IPV6
13
Establishment of harmonized policy, legal and regulatory frameworks
• Develop harmonized regional and continental digital strategies
• Develop and adopt guidelines at regional and continental levels on regulation
• Develop standards and guidelines to promote digitalization
• Promote regional/continental licensing mechanisms to facilitate establishment
of regional/continental operators’ networks and service providers;
• Establish key principles for cooperation between Member States
• Support the African Union Commission and the Regional Economic
Communities in integrating markets
Integrate the provision of eServices, developed by both the public and private sec-
tor, with adequate legal acts and regulation at all levels, ensuring that data needed
to provide eServices for the community is hosted by countries in Africa and openly
available upon request while fully respecting data protection principles.
• Allow relevant organisations in Member States or Region Economic Communi-
ties to reuse core registers and information systems from other organisations
in a secure data exchange environment, enabling the different information
systems and registers to communicate, share data and work together.
• Better use of data for better decision-making around policy and regulation.
Data driven decision- making implies systematic collection and assessment of
market data (both supply and demand) to inform regulation and guide policy
priorities. In addition to the system itself, policymakers and regulators require
clear measurement frameworks and the technical capacity to monitor data
• Develop a framework with Implementing Acts for interoperability and levels of
assurance guided by principles of technology neutrality for cross-border service
provision
Strengthen collaboration between African Institutions and regulators in charge of
digitalization and the protection of personal data
• Establish a common coordinated digitalization agenda in Africa
• Ensure policy coherence for the achievement of digital transformation in Africa
B. DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Digital Infrastructure facilitates the development, provisioning, use and sharing of digital
systems (products and services). These include Telecommunications fixed and wireless
networks including broadband and high speed networks; terrestrial optic fibre networks,
fibre over power lines, submarine cables, satellite communication, mobile communication,
IXPs; Postal infrastructure, Digital Terrestrial Broadcasting, Data Centers; Telecenters, Digi-
tal and smart devices…. This foundation pillar also looks at affordable Devices and Digital
Platforms.
Affordable, accessible and reliable infrastructure is the foundation to achieve an inclusive
digital transformation. Several studies demonstrate that broadband penetration and broad-
14
band quality are important factors for economic growth. According to a World Bank study,
it is estimated that for every 10% increase in broadband penetration in low and middle
income countries result in a commensurate increase of 1.38% of the GDP2. Studies also
reveal the economic impact of broadband deployment directly through jobs created by
deploying broadband infrastructure, and indirectly as a result of ‘spill- over’ externalities,
such as increased productivity and new products and services i.e. through accelerated
innovation3. In this regard, there is a need to expand national broadband coverage, ensure
a conducive regulatory environment, provision of logistical services through transformed
digital postal services and provision of digital platforms to serve as a layer on which mul-
tiple public and private sector organizations can build new or better services and solu-
tions. Internet penetration in Africa is estimated to be 36% or 473 million people online.4
Despite the current infrastructure challenges an additional 300 million people are expected
to come online by 2025. Increasingly, it is “things” rather than people who are connected
(the internet of things includes sensors, voice-activated devices, geospatial instruments,
machine to machine communications, vehicle to vehicle communications, etc) and the
intelligence of the network resides in the “cloud” rather than in the devices themselves.
Therefore, to harness benefits or “dividends” from the digital transformation, abundant, low-
cost connectivity is essential as it is widely understood that broadband drives productivity,
innovation and growth.
Digital platforms are also an essential element of digital infrastructure and can serve peo-
ple, businesses, and government agencies in all aspects of life, including healthcare, edu-
cation, commerce, transportation, and public benefits. Digital platforms serve or enable ot-
her products or services. For the people who use these platforms to receive their monthly
pensions, securely login to a government e- services portal, pay their utility bills, submit a
complaint, access public information, or find a person to rent their car, these platforms can
provide a seamless service delivery experience that increases user convenience, savings,
and agency. For governments, digital platforms can increase the efficiency and effective-
ness of core functions and services; reduce unnecessary duplication of systems; combat
fraud and corruption by increasing the security and traceability of transactions; and im-
prove civic engagement and accountability. For businesses, commercial platforms are an
efficient mechanism to help firms, especially SMEs, expand access to markets, exchange
goods and services and tap into underutilized assets and human resources, which potenti-
ally leads to more and better jobs in the economy.
With regards to Post, the wide reach of its physical infrastructure of nearly 30,000 out-
lets, interconnected to the global network of more than 660.000 Post Offices, can play an
important role in the access to relevant information, digital, social and financial inclusion
of the marginalized population. Given the capillarity of postal outlets and trust of local po-
pulations, the postal sector plays a significant role (a multipurpose platform and one stop
shop) in socio-economic development, particularly in Africa in which 70% of the populati-
on live in rural areas, by facilitating communication, delivery of goods and services as well
as providing wide universal access to many governmental and non-governmental services.
For instance, nearly 1.5 billion people worldwide use postal financial services.
The Post also contributes to UNCTAD Business to Citizens E-commerce Index that
consists of four indicators that are highly related to online shopping.5 Post is the second
largest financial inclusion player, behind the banks but way ahead of microfinance instituti-
ons and mobile telephone operators. A modern postal system which is truly endowed with
appropriate ICT infrastructure can contribute to the delivery of e-governance services, e-
commerce and financial inclusion to Africa’s people notably those in rural and remote areas.
2 Kim, Y., Kelly, T., and Raja, S. (2010). Building broadband: Strategies and policies for the developing world. Global Information and
Communication Technologies (GICT) Department, The World Bank, January 2010.
3 Katz, R. L. (2012). Impact of broadband on the economy: Research to Date and Policy Issues. April 2012, ITU.
4 We Are Social. Hootsuite. Digital 2019
5 https://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/tn_unctad_ict4d12_en.pdf
15
Digital terrestrial broadcasting is another area under the digital infrastructure pillar.
The transition from Analogue to Digital Terrestrial Television also known as the Analogue
Switch-Off (ASO) is a complex and lengthy process through which Analogue Television
Broadcasting is replaced by Digital Television Broadcasting. The process started around
the world in 2000 and the majority of developed countries across the world have comple-
ted the migration to full digital broadcasting services .For ITU Region 1, to which Africa
belongs, the deadline for switching off analogue broadcasting services was decided during
the ITU Regional Radio Communication Conference held in Geneva in 2006 (RRC -06) to
be 17 June, 2015 in UHF band and 17 June, 2020 for some countries in the VHF.
The African Union and the Regional Economic Communities have been at the forefront of
promoting and raising awareness of the decision makers on the importance to accelerate
the migration to Digital Broadcasting. A number of strategic decisions and recommendati-
ons have been adopted by the AU Summit and its organs requesting African organisations
such as AUC, RECs, African Telecommunication Union (ATU) and African Broadcasting Uni-
on (AUB) to coordinate efforts in supporting AU Member States in the migration process.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Nearly 300 million Africans live more than 50 km from a fibre or cable broadband connec-
tion6, hence the lack of widespread availability of high-speed (broadband) internet remains
a significant hurdle for Africa to fully harness the full potential of digital transformation.
Mobile devices remain the primary way by which people access internet today, and de-
dicated internet connections to homes and offices (such as with fiber-to-the-premise) are
mostly absent, except in some capital cities.
Dependence on mobile rather than fixed-line broadband means that unmetered pricing, or
unlimited data use, is not very common in Africa. The mobile phone revolution has however
opened the door to private sector investment in telecoms and now new business models
and services have extended sustainable communication services significantly further. The
value chain of digital infrastructure networks has been unbundled and new private sector
players are developing network infrastructure like independent broadband operators and
tower companies. Previously, to enter a market, an operator needed to invest in internatio-
nal (first mile), national (middle mile), and end-user (last mile) infrastructure. Now there is
competition in each of these segments in most Member States of the African Union, with
specialist service and infrastructure providers either competing or providing services to
vertically-integrated network operators.
Furthermore, currently, submarine cables bring the necessary international connectivity to
coastal areas, and some non-coastal countries are making remarkable efforts to connect
their territory through terrestrial network infrastructures, but this is only the first step of
the digital infrastructure. Currently, a very large part of the IT content consumed in Africa
comes from outside and Data Centers are the digital infrastructure that will allow the
development of a local digital industry. Therefore, Africa needs Data Center Infrastructure
designed to host mission critical servers and computer systems, with fully redundant sub-
systems. The main benefit of this infrastructure localization on the continent will be cost
savings on international connectivity and the latency decrease that will deliver a better
application performance. The second interest is respect for data sovereignty, even though
Africa is at the moment less restrictive, soon it will be necessary to ensure localization of
all personal data of Africa’s citizens.
6 New Africa-Europe Digital Economy Partnership. Accelerating the Achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. 2019
16
As for the postal world and particularly African Postal Services are at a major crossroads
with the development of the digital economy, which is leading to a decline in traditional mail
volumes. Some countries are moving forward but the majority of the Post Offices on the
continent remain with outdated equipment, lack of electricity and Internet Connectivity and
the staff needs to be capacitated with the required skills for the industrial revolution 4.0.
In addition, the combined effects of global liberalization, the lack of investment in critical
production infrastructure, the opportunism of external actors, lack of appropriate and harmo-
nized legislation, conflicts of interest between legislators and operators as well as unne-
cessary peddling of influences, have resulted in the African postal market being generally
invaded by a pack of private predatory operators that undermine the public operators and,
consequently, the provision of universal service which they are supposed to offer to everyo-
ne everywhere. Hence, the switch to digital technology has become a strategic priority for
Posts wishing to remain at the forefront in the increasingly digital world.
Whereas with regards to Digital terrestrial broadcasting, despite commitment to complete
the migration within the ITU deadline, only 16 AU Member States (30%) have been able
to migrate. The majority of Member States are at advanced stage of the migration and will
probably make the Analogue Switch Over (ASO) by 2020, while some have not yet started
the transition process due to various challenges. This situation puts Member States at risk
of cross border interference notably after June 2020, as most Member States broadcast
their services in the VHF band, and no protection will be granted to Analogue services af-
ter the ITU deadline. The slow pace of migration to digital broadcasting also delays the re-
lease a significant amount of high quality radio spectrum referred to as “the digital dividend”
(DD) which can be made available to enhance Mobile Broad Band penetration in Africa.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Promote national, regional and intra-continental interconnectivity
• Develop and implement, national, regional and continental digital infrastructure
master plans taking into account convergence of technologies;
• Establish broadband infrastructure projects that promote regional integration;
• Establish Internet exchange points (IXPs), and promote stakeholder support for
IXPs, remove barriers to entry for IXPs, and nurture a competitive Internet-inter-
connection and traffic- exchange environment
• Modernize existing infrastructure, Integrate and complement new infrastructure
projects with existing infrastructures;
• Ensure that every AU Member State has a minimum of two international
connections to ensure redundancy and competition on the market;
• Establish Data Center Infrastructure designed to host mission critical servers and
computer systems to support the development of a local digital ecosystem;
17
• Attract major equipment manufacturers to install their factories in Africa to
contribute to costs reduction, create an environment conducive to the develop-
ment of skilled human resources and create an African industry that can syner-
gize with industries outside the continent, and generate added value in Africa
and ensure long-term viability of telecommunications infrastructures, which are
still very precarious, given the lack of a balanced financing plan for their mainte-
nance, development and renewal
• Work within international institutions, including the ITU, to adopt rules on the
evolution of technologies, and more particularly the standards on equipment to
guarantee the technological interoperability of one generation of equipment to
another to avoid the short-term obsolescence of equipment already deployed
• Develop enabling institutional framework that promotes the development and
implementation of community networks.
Promote infrastructure sharing
• Ensure close collaboration and coordination with basic utilities infrastructure net-
works such as electricity, water pipe lines and transport networks in the rollout of
digital infrastructure
• Encourage infrastructure and site sharing among Telecommunication/ICT
Operators
• Avoid the multiplicity of initiatives and redundancies in the deployment of
infrastructure and promoting the implementation of common infrastructures,
and capitalizing on other sectoral infrastructures (electrical transport networks, as
back-hailing in telecommunications)
Boost investment in telecom infrastructure at national, regional level to an intercon-
nected continent, and develop financial instruments through partnerships between
investors, government, financial institutions and international partners
• Build on and scale up existing initiatives to map the infrastructure needs in
Africa and provide a priority list for investments in building the missing links
taking into account all connectivity technologies and services
• Create innovative financial instruments for infrastructure deployment in Africa
with a focus on underserved areas
• Establish a cloud computing infrastructure in Africa
• Establish digital labor market infrastructure system
Promote a favourable regulatory environment for competitive and harmonised re-
gional and continental connectivity markets
• Develop a policy and regulatory framework that overhauls all infrastructure net-
work, services and platforms to support a high-speed, multi-channel connectivity
that will ensure ubiquitous, reliable, affordable access
• Strengthen the capacity of policymakers and regulators to implement harmoni-
sed telecom rules at the regional and continental level
• Foster transparent, predictable, pro-investment and pro-innovation regulatory
frameworks
18
Promote measures that increase affordability of broadband and technology devices
& services
• Implement initiatives to help reduce the price of devices and services
• Promote establishment of One Area Network for harmonization of mobile
voice/data roaming in Africa to reduce on communication costs
• Utilize Universal Service Funds to extend infrastructure to underserved areas
and reduce access pricing
• Adopt appropriate policy and regulation in areas such as taxation to promote
the affordability of Internet
• Prioritise connections to public buildings such as libraries and schools
• Develop Digital platforms to serve people, businesses, and government
agencies in all aspects of life, including healthcare, education, commerce,
transportation, and public benefits.
• Ensure access to affordable devices to people living with disability,
elderly and the disadvantaged to access internet
Invest in green ICT
• Mobilize resources to invest in Green ICT
• Develop a continental green ICT program
• Encourage environmental protection actions through the management of
electronic waste
Commit to undertake or strengthen ICT and postal policies reforms.
• Consider the postal sector and postal financial services (PFS) as an essential
component of digital economy and the financial inclusion ecosystem;
• Include postal digitalization in both national priorities and national digital strate-
gy as part of the innovation strategy for posts;
• Accelerate and intensify policy reform and speed up the implementation
of existing decisions from the AU policy organs on reform, universal postal
service, financial inclusion, post codes and addressing systems
• Promote the postal sector as a key vehicle to foster socio-economic development
• Use the postal sector as a platform to deliver government’s services to all
citizens for digital, financial and social inclusion;
Define a new framework for the role of the postal sector in particular in providing
universal access to ICTs and Facilitate postal services access to funding for invest-
ment and infrastructure development and capacity building
19
• Digitalize the basic information infrastructure for postal services especially for
e-commerce development;
• Encourage public-private partnership for increased investment in the posts;
• Accelerate implementation of addressing systems
Facilitate the coordination efforts to migrate to digital terrestrial broadcasting and
harmonized use of the digital dividend at regional and continental level
• The AU Commission, ATU, AUB and RECS to coordinate efforts in providing
assistance and support for African countries to enable them to complete the
migration to Digital Terrestrial Broadcasting by June 2020.
• Work towards a harmonized use of the released radio frequencies (Digital
Dividend) at regional and continental levels through developing policy and
regulatory framework that ensures an equitable access and efficient use of
these resources.
C. DIGITAL SKILLS & HUMAN CAPACITY
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Several preconditions must be met for Africa to realize the much-aspired digital transfor-
mation and be a globally competitive continent. The main one among them is the invest-
ment in and cultivation of highly skilled people, as producers, consumers and innovators
of digital technologies. Investing in digital capabilities of citizens underpinned by both
technological and human capacity offers the most robust strategy for the future. A critical
mass of skilled workforce that can effectively master and apply emerging technological
advancements & their sophisticated integration within every aspect of the social, econo-
mic and political systems is needed. Similarly, as active participants in the digital ecosys-
tem, citizens must possess digital capabilities to embrace and use digital advancement in
their daily lives. Emerging technologies require measures to continue building the digital
skills of people not only as consumers but also as citizens. A collective digital capacity at
individual, organizational and sectoral level is deemed critical to sustainably capitalize on
home-grown and adaptive technological advancements.
20
The supreme currency in the digital age are people and their skills. With appropriate and
coordinated human and institutional capacity development strategy, Africa’s most precious
asset, the youth who constitute 60% of the overall population, can be remodeled, harn-
essed, empowered and transformed into a digitally adaptive, skilled and innovative work-
force that not only comprehend, adopt and move with global trends but chart its own digital
pathways towards inclusive growth and development. New pathways with new sources of
job creation are possible in this age of technological change.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
There is an African digital skills gap and there is also the locally trained human potential
that African countries are struggling to keep and use at national level. This gap widens
when the gender gap is included. In addition, a youth “bulge” will result in 375 million
young people entering the labor market by 2030. Ensuring the widespread availability of
Digital Skills which allows individuals and businesses to harness the opportunities and
guard against the risks of the digital economy is fundamental.
Big Data
Using keyboards
an touchscreens Virtual reallity
Creating professional Digital
online profiles entrepreneurship
BASIC SKILLS ADVANCED SKILLS
Word
Internet of
Cybersecurity
processing
Managing privacy Things
settings
Artificial
Intelligence
Email
Desktop
Publishing
INTERMEDIATE
SKILLS
Digital
Grafic Design Digital
Marketing
Source: ITU-2018-Continuum of Digital Skills7
7 ITU-2018- Digital Skills Toolkit- Decent Jobs for youth-digital skills campaign
21
Building digital capability will enable African countries progress towards the foundation
for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) thematic Indicator 4.4.2: “Percentage of youth/
adults who have achieved at least a minimum level of proficiency in digital literacy skills”.
However, digital capability will not be an easy endeavor in a continent faced with many
lingering challenges of underdevelopment, poverty and instability, just to mention a few.
Africa has the lowest literacy rate of 64.0% compared to the global average rate of 86.3%
for people aged 15 and above (2). 15% of the African workforce is unemployed and 41%
of Africa‘s 1.3 billion population are within the economically dependent age group of 15
years or below [2]. Although Africa makes 16% of the world population, its GDP share to
the global economy only amounts to 5% (IMF, 2019). According to UNDP’s 2018 Human
Development Index (HDI) that measures people’s wellbeing from three dimensions of
longer and healthier life, access to education and standard of living, Africa is still lagging
far behind the rest of the world. Despite notable cross- continental progress over the past
few years, inequalities remained wide and deeper. Africa’s school enrolment at pre-pri-
mary, secondary, and tertiary levels is grossly lower by 27% than the global average, while
primary school dropout is higher by 21%. Gender inequality is also apparent. Females who
make half of the population with higher social influence and life expectancy have low adult
literacy and access to digital technologies, when compared to their male counterparts.
With the advancement of the digital economy and the encroachment of labour saving
technologies, African countries will need people with skills that complement these tech-
nologies to allow new pathways to emerge. In light of this, any capacity development
effort to digitize the African society must be people-centred, locally owned, deliberate and
a systematically designed process to empower individuals, organizations and the society
as a whole, to unleash, strengthen, create, adapt, and maintain capacity over time. Such
a holistic digital capacity development approach allows the continual building of both the
requisite digital skills and competencies and enabling environments. Education is a uni-
versally accepted basic human right that plays a decisive role in determining the society’
capability to survive and thrive in the digitized global world. A skill-focused education
system produces the required number, type and quality of workforces to develop and
adopt digital systems, while the application of digital technologies further enables and
continuously reshape the education curriculum, delivery and administration processes at
all levels – from pre-primary to tertiary and lifelong learning. Accordingly, this require edu-
cation systems to be flexible, inclusive, proactive and tuned into producing a new breed of
workforce that readily and continually learns and unlearns on a wide array of complex skills
and competency required in the ever-changing digital world. The report by the Pathways
for Prosperity Commission on digital readiness stresses that harnessing the digital age
requires two types of skills to develop at national and continental level. The first set of
skills is Digital Skills. Each society will need to have a sufficiently large group with advan-
ced digital knowledge and engineering skills. These skills are also required at the govern-
ment level in order to be able to make decisions, support and take advantage of emerging
opportunities. For the broader workforce, digital literacy is essentially required. For this,
expanding access to the internet is essential for basic digital skills. The second set of skills
that need to be cultivated are Digital Complementary Skills. Those skills that cannot easily
be automated or codified will be increasingly in high demand in the digital economy. Skills
such as empathy, personal communication, business consulting, communication and
language skills as well as creativity and adaptability. Socio-emotional interpersonal skills as
well as hard cognitive skills that are difficult to computerize would need to be developed
and nurtured further. These are the skills of the future that any of the countries in Africa
need not underestimate and seek to capitalize on in terms of crafting clear and strategic
policy in making themselves digital ready.
22
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Review education curricula in accordance with the evolving needs and trends in the
digital economy and society
• Review education curricula according to current needs and trends in the digital
society, economy and labour market, with a focus on Innovation, Science, Tech-
nology, Engineering, Art and Maths (iSTEAM) and a combination of digital, 21st
century and e-business skills, across all areas of learning.
• Promote gender-inclusive education frameworks and policies and boost
relevant education opportunities and digital skills development for women and
girls in STEAM-subjects to narrow the gender digital divide.
• Encourage diversity and inclusion in STEAM education and support the up
skilling of citizens to mitigate against job losses.
Provide schools and other educational institutions with technology equipment
and, where possible, broadband Internet connection. More advanced equipment
will need to be provided by companies in work-based learning systems. In parallel,
ensure that teachers access digital training and promote the development of train-
the-teachers programmes, both for their own professional development and for
educating students on the use of technology to help create a scale-up and multiplier
effect.
• Promote technology-supported learning, including creating and scaling-up
eLearning platforms, which offer instant access, and use open educational
resources. Ensure that innovative digital knowledge products and learning
opportunities reach people from diverse educational, social backgrounds and
regions, also by ensuring all platforms have mobile versions. To enhance
access, the creation of specific offline functionalities targeted to those living
in disconnected remote areas is encouraged.
• Support the establishment and scale-up of online higher-level education insti-
tutions, with curricula that combine STEAM with transversal skills. Support the
development of learning communities active within online platforms, to promote
peer-to-peer learning and exchange of best practices, as a model including a
mix of blended learning to enhance completion rates.
• Scale-up projects and programmes that apply an intersectional approach to
promote institutional networking and support quality higher education in Africa,
tailoring policies and actions to the needs of regional and national labour market
Develop partnerships through a multi-stakeholder African Alliance for Digital Skills
and Jobs
• Engage public stakeholders, private companies, international organisations and
donors, universities and NGOs to deliver expertise on market needs and re-
view, co-create education curricula at all levels and establish new programmes
focusing on digital skills;
• Support knowledge transfer, exchange programmes between a) innovation
hubs and research centres, and b) incentivizing mentorship or role model
programmes.
• Develop forecasting tools to analyse the existing skills base and evolving needs
in the labour market
23
• Set up incentive mechanisms and develop a regional qualification framework
for African institutions to become centres of excellence delivering training on
ICT in line with market needs
Mainstream digital skills and responsible online behaviour among all citizens to
enable them to be active and successful participants in the digital society and raise
awareness of risks in terms of digital rights, online safety and security
• Build multi-stakeholder public-private partnerships to provide training on
responsible online behaviour and digital hygiene;
• Ensure that online services that are relevant to the everyday life of citizens
(i.e. eGovernment, eLearning, eAgriculture etc.) are tailored to different levels
of literacy, including financial literacy and digital skills, ensuring recognition in
national and sector strategies.
• Invest in education initiatives that increase mobile digital literacy and confidence
for men and women across all levels of education, income and familiarity with
mobile and the internet;
• Scale-up training programmes on digital financial literacy
• Integrate libraries and other life-long learning venues into digital skills strategies
Facilitate digital skills development across all sectors of the economy that use tech-
nology with a specific focus on governments, administrations, service providers and
civil society
• Create a skills-related policy environment that keeps up with digital entre-
preneurship and ensures a business environment where trained professionals
are linked with relevant business opportunities, which serves as a platform to
propagate lifelong learning in the rapidly changing digital landscape.
• Ensure that training initiatives targeting existing and future workers across all
sectors, including ICT professionals, encourage computational thinking, 21st
century skills and provide advanced digital skills.
• Promote learning opportunities delivered by public and private partners for
workers across all sectors, including on-the-job training and rapid-skill-training
as well as knowledge sharing and mentoring within national and regional inno-
vation hubs.
• Conduct an African Industry demand skills assessment study to identify the
required specific skills to drive African Industries
• Design training programmes on digital skills specifically targeting SMEs and
start-ups within innovation hubs, at the national and regional level.
• Develop targeted learning opportunities to enhance skills among African web
content developers.
• Promote the enhancement of digital skills through advanced in-company trai-
ning and on-the-job training, after education and capacity building.
• Incentivize local and international companies to hire and train young African
inexperienced human resources for local jobs or in the context of circular mig-
ration.
24
• Stimulate governments to use more local IT-resources and train them on the
job, using international expertise to deliver on-the-job training;
• Adjust the international tender processes to include the possibility to make
more use of locally trained/educated people.
• Stimulate diaspora reintegration and provide targeted on-the-job training.
• Support development of national and regional ICT Centers of Excellence for
skills development
• Encourage development of e-schools bags
• Develop smart classes and digitalize learning materials
• Develop digital literacy programs at grass root level
D. DIGITAL INNOVATION & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
GENERAL OVERVIEW
The priority for science and technology innovation in Africa has been emphasized by the
African Union through the adoption of the Science, Technology and Innovation Strategy for
Africa 2024 (STISA) and the African Science and Technology Consolidated Plan of Action
(CPA).
Technology and innovation have been the major forces of progress in the world in recent
years in terms of poverty reduction, human development, growth and competitiveness of
national economies in the 21st Century. The importance of technology for development
and economic growth was recognized in the SDGs and the AU 2063 Agendas and it is well
recognized that it plays an even more central role in the attainment of all SDGs. In fact,
the Goal 9 of the Sustainable Development Goals, “Build resilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation”, implies that without tech-
nology and innovation, industrialization will not happen, and that without industrialization,
development will not happen.
Innovation is at the heart of the continuing digital revolution that is affecting almost every
part of the social, commercial, and political areas. Relentless innovation in the hardware,
software, applications and networking fields including, Cloud Services, Artificial Intelligen-
ce, Blockchain, and the Internet of Things, 3D Printing, Digital Sequencing, Nanotechnolo-
gy and sensors among others are driving change at a staggering pace. Innovation and Ent-
repreneurship are thus critical if Africa has to remain in the race with the rest of the world,
and benefit from the Digital transformation within the broader framework of Agenda 2063.
This innovation ecosystem is giving rise to new ways of doing old things (e.g., mobile
payment) as well as completely new forms of activity (e.g., Social media). Digital entre-
preneurship takes advantage of these innovations and is on the rise across Africa. For Af-
rican countries, there is a need for incubators, technology parks and national and regional
innovation centers.
There is no question that the number of technology startups and the organizations to
support them has multiplied in recent years. In Africa we now have an inspiring generation
of entrepreneurs that is working actively to bring the benefits of the digital age to every
citizen and organization of Africa by unleashing the power of modern-day technology for
the benefit of society. It is a generation that seeks to help create a brighter future full of
opportunities and possibilities for the many generations.
25
INTEGRATED DIGITAL ENTREPRENEURIAL ECOSYSTEM INTERVENTION
Digital and entre- Ecosystem support Early-stage and Business Environment
preneurial readiness interventions (e.g., growth support interventions (e.g.,
interventions (e.g., accrelerators, interventions (e.g., business registration,
bootcamps, entreor- innovation huns, VC and angle funds, bank and finance
eneurial rapidtraining mentor networks, matching grants, requirements, tech
programms, university- events and accelerator seed talent hiring
industry platforms, etc.) competitions, etc.) investment, etc.) requirements, etc.)
New Talent Ecosystem fully Early-stage finance Access to finance, talent;
Digital ready for supporting digital ladder available for domestic registration
savvy digital entrepreneurs digital entrepeneurs fast-tracked
work- entrepre-
force neurship
Intrapreneurship and technology adoption and Creation of new digital
adaptation by existing companies startup ventures
Creation of new Creation of new
digital jobs digital industries
Increase country cometitiveness
and economic output
Africa has 400+ technology hubs in 93 cities and 42 countries. More than 130 new hubs
have opened over the last two years. There was an almost four-fold yearly increase in total
funding received for start-ups in 20188. In addition, the number of funding deals more than
doubled and startups on the continent are increasingly receiving bigger ticket rounds of
over $5 million. In 2018, African startups, mainly ICT, raised a record $1.1 billion9. African
entrepreneurs have been at the forefront of using digital technologies to create innovative
solutions to development problems. In each problem, constraint, or challenge, these in-
novators see opportunities. Some experiences, such as mobile money and pay as you go
solar, have given Africa hope that it can also be a dynamic and innovative player.
8 Weetracker 2018
9 Partech Partners, African Tech Startups, March 2019
26
The concept of the digital innovation divide entails that not all ecosystems are equal,
either in terms of the inputs of talent (intellectual and creative), investment, and resources
or in terms of their output, whether technological, social, or financial. This means that
some communities and ecosystems are developing and benefitting from emerging tech-
nology and ICT-centric innovation, while others are reliant on older technologies or see litt-
le access to ICTs at all. These can be seen as the continuum of economies, moving from
extractive, factor driven economies; through efficiency driven economies, which adopt
technologies from other areas; to innovation driven economies. In many cases, different
communities or sectors within an economy will exist at different points in this continuum,
widening the innovation divide.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Despite the strong entrepreneurial mindset and the growing number of digital entrepre-
neurial intermediaries, Africa has not translated its potential into a vibrant or comprehen-
sive digital entrepreneurial ecosystem, with commercial digital hubs that can generate
talent and ventures to compete at the highest global level.
The innovation divide stems in part from inefficiencies in the use or allocation of resources
in the innovation ecosystem, from a lack of key supports, policies, and other elements of a
nurturing environment, as well as a need for further collaboration between stakeholders in
order to develop a complete ecosystem through coordinated support activities.
Focus should be on the whole system, rather than simply investing in inputs, and the
need to neither under- nor over-utilize government intervention and ensure a cohesive,
integrated regime of policies related to the ecosystem.
Member States will need to continue designing customized interventions to strengthen
their specific entrepreneurship ecosystems of mutually reinforcing components that
include a digital knowledge base and ICT market; a digital business friendly environment;
access to finance; digital skills and e- leadership; and an entrepreneurial culture.
Realizing the vision of digital transformation for Africa will require appropriate digital in-
novation and entrepreneurship development policy agenda in alignment with the Sustai-
nable Development Goals and the Science, Technology and Innovation Strategy for Africa
2024 (STISA) to enhance the competitiveness of the African private sector, to support the
growth in the use of ICT, develop and strengthen institutional capacity. There is a need for
Africa to develop its own model of innovation and avoid the reproduction of models that,
although they may have succeeded elsewhere, do not necessarily adhere to the socio-
economic realities of the African continent.
Intellectual Property (IP) Rights also take a fundamental role as the core of the Digital
Economy and the digital transformation and, as such, those rights need to be strategically
protected. An IP strategy is absolutely necessary for a start-ups to protect their innovation
and prove themselves worthy of investment.
27
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Improve the policies for digital innovation and entrepreneurship
• Develop effective legal, institutional and regulatory framework and policy agen-
da for supporting the development of digital innovation, entrepreneurship and
research & development
• Develop adaptive and anticipatory regulations legal and regulatory systems
promoting academic and other forms of entrepreneurship, etc.
• Develop a National System of Innovation to address the pressing barriers to
capabilities of humans to advance digital innovation, mainly poverty (broad de-
finition), inequality (redistribution); social capital (cohesion & trust); institutions
(policies, organizations, networks); natural capital (electricity, water); economic
resources (e.g. access to credit, transport);
• Build government capacity on policy design, implementation on technology-
related policies as well as on broader policies
• Strengthen the Protection of Intellectual and Innovative Property Right
• Encourage start-ups to obtain patents and protect their ideas and innovations
• Promote and facilitate the development of private sector to stimulate both the
supply of and demand for technologies needed in the economic sectors
• Promote development of innovation products that have commercial, social and
economic relevance and are providing real added value for the African economy
and contribute to social development
• Encourage innovators to develop products whose deployment preserves the
economic equilibrium of African countries, particularly their foreign exchange
reserves
• Establish retention mechanisms for young innovators, whose training and / or
projects are financed by funds dedicated to the development of Africa.
Create a conducive environment to empower people to innovate and facilitate
access to finance and funding mechanisms for digital enterprises
• Develop structures and mechanisms that promote the production, diffusion,
use and management of technology and innovations to accelerate the achieve-
ment of Agenda 2063 and SDG targets
• Establish an Innovation Fund from which the growing pool of hardworking and
successful entrepreneurs can tap resources to stimulate digital innovation and
entrepreneurship development, and commercialization through public-private
partnership
• Provide incentives in the form of awards and national recognition to encourage
innovation
• Facilitate access to funding for start-ups by local ecosystems (hubs) and
development partners
28
• Build and support country-level angel investor networks in partnership with
continental networks and educate and attract international venture capital firms
to invest into African tech
• Support the establishment of local digital innovation centres serving as a co-
creation and innovation hub for digital solutions of tomorrow and as a first entry
point for foreign investors
Create an enabling ecosystem that addresses all interrelated barriers and needs and
improve advisory services to stimulate digital entrepreneurship for digital enterprises
• Customize support to digital entrepreneurs, support networking for more peer
mentorship services. Regionally, seek for successful serial entrepreneurs and
“star geeks”.
• Develop a holistic continental mapping of ecosystems, building on existing
initiatives, to identify and support the scaling-up of innovative models and fi-
nancing platforms, accompanied by relevant soft and business skills training for
digital entrepreneurs and to inform investors on existing relevant opportunities.
This includes crowd funding, innovative fintech tools, mobile banking. Holistic
mapping of the ecosystems to identify promising models that can be scaled up
in Africa.
• Promote the availability of quality information, accuracy and accessibility to
market actors, to increase awareness of existing solutions and opportunities
among digital entrepreneurs and the public.
• Promote open data policies that can ensure the mandate and sustainability of
data exchange platforms or initiatives to enable new local business models,
while ensuring data protection and cyber resilience to protect citizens from
misuse of data and businesses from cybercrime.
• Encourage governments to entrust national start-ups and social enterprises
with public projects by adopting their cost-efficient solutions to address local
issues (agriculture, health, administration).
• Segment and group countries by the maturity level of their innovation ecosys-
tem and define four or five thematic business clusters as centres of excellence,
in the context of the EU-Africa Start-up Initiative to be created (proposed action
under recommendation on partnerships).
• Support African digital entrepreneurs to network and showcase their products
outside Africa – i.e. in trade fairs.
• Encourage cooperation with start-up advocacies to further improve market and
regulatory reforms through multi-stakeholder dialogue.
• Train, advise, coach and mentor the entrepreneurs through blended learning.
29
Establish and strengthen partnerships among African actors, to harmonise efforts
related to digital entrepreneurship at the continental, regional and national level
• The AU Commission to create an online portal for African Entrepreneurs, Start-
Ups and SMEs business for marketing of their services and skills and to encou-
rage AU member-states to sources services from the listed Entrepreneurs so
as to support Intra-Africa Trade, in line with AfCFTA
• Embed digital entrepreneurship in continental, regional and national policies
and enable structured policy dialogue between public and private partners to
inform policymakers about the most pressing actions to be made in creating a
favourable environment for digital entrepreneurship, with a focus on building
on continental, regional and national partnerships
• Support Member States in setting up national start-up strategies and start-up
laws in terms of both legislation drafting, and enforcement. Invest in research
for start-up Acts. This should be based on a multi-stakeholder, bottom-up ap-
proach and taking entrepreneurs‘ point of view into the legislation process.
• Fund regional and continental knowledge-sharing, training and technical mee-
tings, addressing the needs of the digital ecosystems and create open educa-
tional resources
• Support the establishment and financing of innovation Hubs in collaboration
with private sector
• Encourage and promote digital innovations designed locally by empowering all
relevant local actors (governments, start-ups, researchers, private sector)
30
VIII. CRITICAL SECTORS TO DRIVE
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
Digitalization of the following sectors are critical if the benefits of digital transformation are
to be realized by the general population. The successful digitalization of these sectors is
dependent on the implementation of the foundations pillars mentioned above.
A. DIGITAL INDUSTRY
GENERAL OVERVIEW
There is need for Africa to develop a competitive advantage in the area of digital exploita-
tion and production through the development of a competitive ICT industry and service
sector. The digital industry will play a key role as a key partner in the process of moving
the continent into the fourth Industrial revolution. Member States will therefore need to
promote and facilitate the role of the private sector in the development and participation
in the global digital economy. Digital technologies have opened new ways to organize
production, logistics and delivery, and offers better means to serve and satisfy consumers.
Mass production is increasingly flexible, individualized and resource friendly to be able to
serve the customer markets. Production is monitored and controlled in real-time to reflect
dynamically changing customer demands. At the other end of the chain, real-time consu-
mer trends are collected with increasing levels of granularity. Big data is produced, traded
and shared. A major share of the value of the whole business domain is contained in this
big data.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
The Industrial ecosystem is being redefined as ICT rises as the core element of compe-
titiveness in all industrial sectors bringing about mass expansion of new products and
services. However, the low levels of know-how for the tools in the Digital Industry is
threatening the traditional industries.
There has been an active expansion of online companies generating competition with
offline giants, disrupting the traditional manufacturing, delivery and sales processes albeit
in Africa, the sectors such as agriculture, government services, manufacturing that could
benefit from such innovation has lagged behind, due to legacy processes or high startup
investments. The need to use industrial digital technologies such as additive manufactu-
ring, artificial intelligence, remote monitoring, 3D printing and cloud analytics is the way to
ensure that Africa’s industries are digitalized. For example, the manufacturing industry is
faced with new technological opportunities and business models.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Support the development and growth of the ICT industry to facilitate the produc-
tion, distribution and provision of ICT products, goods and services
• Establish ICT assembling and manufacturing plants
• Promote development and production of computer software and hardware
in Africa
• Facilitate setting up of business process outsourcing (BPO) in Africa
31
• Establish Technological Parks and Incubators and ensure that each region in the
continent has a Technological Park and Incubation Hub
• Encourage and assist industries in the use of ICT to automate and modernize
their business and industrial processes
• Support the industrial sector so that it can generate employment opportunities
that serve to eradicate poverty
Promote and attract investment to spur the digital industry in Africa
• Encourage and facilitate the active participation of African and foreign investors
in the digital industry and in the development the ICT export sector
• Promote joint ventures between local and foreign companies to facilitate the
rapid development of the digital industry and service sector
• Promote the development of a competitive ICT export sector with the active
participation of local producers and service providers.
Create conducive environment to promote growth of the digital industry
• Establish regulatory clarity between online and offline businesses within the
same sector
• Invest in digital infrastructure, lowering tariffs on digital products, encourage
adoption of low- tech, disruptive applications such as mobile money and social
media, and reduce product market regulations.
• Incentivize firms to invest in more efficient digital solutions and encourage the
entry of startups that can put competitive pressure on incumbent firms
B. DIGITAL TRADE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, envisions Africa as a continent on equal footing with
the rest of the world as an information society, an integrated e-economy where every
government, business and citizen has access to reliable and affordable ICT services by in-
creasing broadband penetration and providing venture capital to young ICT entrepreneurs
and innovators.
This critical sector looks at the development of a robust digital market characterized by
increased quality of financial inclusion, fair competition and advanced consumer protection
with main focus areas on digital trade and financial services.
The AfCFTA will be a market of 1.2 billion consumers, which will reach 1.7 billion by 2030
with a combined GDP of 2.5 trillion US dollars, but equivalent to 6.4 trillion US dollars
when measured in purchasing power parity terms. In addition, Africa’s current private and
business to business consumption is estimated at US$4.0 trillion. Estimates by the UN Eco-
nomic Commission for Africa show that, just taking account of the goods market alone, the
value of intra-African trade will increase by between 15 per cent (or additional US$50 billion)
and 25 per cent (or additional US$69.1 billion) relative to the baseline by 2040. Intra-African
trade in industrial products will see gains of between 25 per cent (or US$36.1 billion) and 30
per cent (equivalent to US$43.3 billion) above the baseline by 2040.
32
Integrating Africa to a single digital market will create economies of scale and opportuni-
ties to grow Africa’s economies and the key to unlocking these opportunities is the ability
to adapt to digital trade and financial services. E-commerce and Digital Financial Inclu-
sion will be the basic enablers in this case to ensure that Africa truly becomes the single
digital market we want. Digital trade encompasses digitally-enabled transactions of trade
in goods and services that can either be digitally or physically delivered, and that involve
consumers, firms, and governments (OECD).
E-Commerce transaction is the sale or purchase of goods or services, conducted over
computer networks by methods specifically designed for the purpose of receiving or
placing of orders. The payment and the ultimate delivery of the goods or services do not
have to be conducted online (OECD).
Digital Financial Services refers to a broad range of financial services accessed and delive-
red through digital channels, including payments, credit, savings, remittances and insuran-
ce. Digital channels used for these financial transactions are the internet, mobile phones,
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), Point of Sales (POS) terminals among other tools.
Digital Financial Services (DFS) concept includes mobile financial services (MFS) which
has become a very popular trend across the African continent with the emergence of the
use of mobile phones to access financial services and execute financial transactions such
as M-Banking, M-payments and M-money.
REGISTERED MOBILE MONEY ACCOUNTS IN WORLD REGIONS,
2013-18
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Sub-Saharan Africa 98.30 146.00 222.80 277.40 348.60 395.70
Northern Africa and
35.80 37.90 41.70 44.10 47.27 48.89
Middle East
Latin America and the
8.30 14.90 17.30 23.00 23.53 26.99
Caribbean
East Asia and the
23.70 21.80 26.00 36.60 68.55 94.61
Pacific
South Asia 35.50 76.90 101.90 164.20 258.36 287.59
Europe and Central
1.50 1.50 1.70 10.40 11.55 12.35
Asia
Source: GSMA (2017), 2017 State of the Industry Report on Mobile Money
With the launch of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), the importance and
relevance of Digital Financial Services becomes primordial as it would facilitate greater
intra-African trade and put in place the needed cross border payment systems in the
operationalization phase of the AfCFTA. It would also facilitate the transactions involved
in other financial products and services (e.g., to deposit savings or make a loan payment).
Transaction data produced by digital payments can also reduce informational asymmetries
between borrowers and lenders, and serve as a useful input into credit decisions, inclu-
ding choices related to trade finance for small businesses.
33
Digitalization offers new opportunities to boost the economy (through e-commerce and
digital Financing), cut red tape and reduce trade costs (through e-payments, e-government
and the digitalization of public services), leap frog and participate in the 4th industrializa-
tion revolution. This potential is even greater for Landlocked Developing Countries (LDCs).
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
In spite of the opportunities, there are several limitations that African countries continue
to face; some of which relate to the current infrastructure, digital and technological gap.
While digital trade represents a multi-trillion-dollar market globally, Africa currently claims
only a small slice of e-commerce revenues. Nevertheless, Digital trade in Africa is rapidly
growing and is expected to constitute a growing share of trade towards the intra African
trade agreement.
Increasing infrastructure and deploying the right policies for e-commerce enables the large
informal sector and enterprises to market, receive payment and make purchases with
international buyers, thus increasing the scale of market.
In 2017, e-commerce accounted for 12 per cent of global trade in goods (International Trade
Centre, 2017). The International Trade Centre estimated that the market size of e-commer-
ce would reach US$50billion in 2018 from US$8billion in 2013 (International Trade Centre,
2015), while McKinsey has projected that the value of e-commerce will reach US$300bil-
lion by 2025 (McKinsey, 2013). For cross- border trade, there is the opportunity to export
a greater number and diversity of goods to a larger pool of countries (International Trade
Centre, 2017).
New technologies give access to markets that were previously closed and removes distor-
tions in demand by giving customers direct access to products previously controlled. Ra-
pid technological developments have created new markets that now connect consumers,
lower transaction costs and reduce information asymmetry.
E-commerce channels are increasingly being used by governments for the delivery of
public services such as visa processing and issuance, civil registration, tax payments
and tendering. For trade facilitation, trade portals to provide trade information, and single
windows are used to enable the virtual completion of trade formalities with the associated
reduction in time and cost of clearing goods at ports. These single windows are also used
to coordinate the processes of the multiple government agencies operating at seaports.
Digital Financial Services is also another sector that needs to be further tapped into.
Not only does it provide users with the flexibility to do financial transactions and banking
online and on the go, but it is also a means to settle trade payments, digitalize govern-
ment transactions through Central Banks, move from traditional paper based Banking to
Digitalized and automated systems that are more efficient, easier to track and monitor;
and quicker to access.
The link between financial inclusion and development is well recognized and that financial
inclusion can play a great role in attaining many of the SDGs. The use of financial techno-
logy, in particular mobile money, has become increasingly widespread in a number of
Member States of the African Union. For example Kenya is ranked as 26th worldwide in
the Digital Financial Inclusion Rankings. Of the more than 395.7 million registered mobile
money accounts in Africa, greater than 145.8 million are active (GSMA report 2018). In
addition, according to the 2018 Africa’s Development Dynamics on Growth, (AUC/OECD),
Africa uses more mobile banking than all other developing regions put together.
The Digital Financial Services (DFS) market in Africa looks very promising. Mobile financial
services have become an important component of Africa’s financial services landscape,
34
from payments and current accounts, to savings, loans, investment and insurance. Central
Banks are also working in close collaboration with Private Banks to develop Digital Finan-
cial Strategies with an area of focus on cashless economies.
Digital regional payments systems have also emerged to reduce the cost and time asso-
ciated with cross-border trade, such as:
• COMESA Regional Payment and Settlement System
• East African Payments System
• SADC Integrated Regional Electronic Settlement System
At the continental level, a couple of payments and settlement platforms are also under
development such as the ones by UPU and Afreximbank. The UPU- Ecom@africa initia-
tive aims at establishing an integrated, inclusive and innovative e-commerce ecosystem
provided by designated Operators through e-commerce (online) platforms using the postal
network and products for cross-border logistics, deliveries, returns and payments, while
the one for Afreximbank is expected to allow cross-border payments wherein both the
sender and receiver transact in local currencies.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Promote intra-African integration in digital trade to achieve wider participation by
enterprises in national, regional and international e-commerce (especially cross-
border)
• Ensure inclusive digital society extending to the under-banked and unbanked
• Promote the development of cross-border digital commerce, advocated in the
draft strategy, and must be designed, at least initially, within an intra-continent
framework so that it contributes to promoting the complementarity of African
economies.
• Reduce barriers to cross-border digital trade and market access by supporting
Africa’s efforts to establish a continental digital single market in line with the
Continental Free Trade Agreement that aims at removing legal and technical
barriers to trade
• Develop an enabling regulatory framework for e-commerce at the continental
level, including common rules for consumer protection
• Allow regional and continental integration of African data markets through open
standards, while taking into account that security and regular upgrading of
these tools must be guaranteed
• Develop and improve the regulatory environment for financial and payment
services
• Develop a regulatory framework for cross-border mobile money transfer
• Develop regulation on unjustified geo-blocking (where delivery of online pro-
ducts is not permitted)
35
• Support programmes promoting e-Money adoption, especially in rural & peril-
urban areas
• Include elements on e-commerce in the digital skills training programmes
targeted at Africa’s MSMEs.
• Develop training/outreach campaigns to increase awareness and trust. Edu-
cating Africa’s consumers about the benefits of online Banking, shopping and
some basic safety rules will be a key factor to drive consumer adoption.
• Analyse issues relating to parcel delivery and propose solutions based on regio-
nal cooperation
• Support eco-system initiatives that tackle the issue of lack of physical addresses.
Create a conducive environment for the development and uptake of digital financial
services
• Create a supportive regulatory environment that allows the linking of different
fintech solutions (and if possible, conventional banking services, to target the
market of remittance payments and to further include the unbanked and increa-
se their access to financial services)
• Harmonize rules for KYC AML/CFT compliance by Member States including
reducing or eliminating multiple databases across countries with divergent
information about the same individuals
• Develop national and regional forums to foster public and private dialogue
around Digital Financial policy and regulation. The continuous evolution and in-
novation in the sector require continuous dialogue between the government and
the private sector to develop the right enabling environment for the private sector
to develop the right services that will be used by the unbanked populations
• Ensure national and regional interoperability projects for e-Money and other DFS
solutions
• Enable market entry of innovative, technology-driven financial service providers
and solutions and encourage greater competitiveness
• Strengthen financial consumer protections with respect to disclosure/transpa-
rency, responsible lending, data privacy, and dispute resolution
• Establishing technology-forward Regional and National financial inclusion
strategies
• Encourage Blockchain for e-transaction
• Encourage the creation of a single African payments area to bolster
cross-border trade, transfers and investments;
• Promote legislation on registration, ease of doing business and mobile
payments integration across borders for digital entrepreneurs
• Digitize government-to-person payments
• Enable the use of low-cost delivery channels, including retail agents
36
• Use the African Union Financial Institutions flagship project as one of the key
vehicles to develop the continent’s financial sector and put in place an African
single currency to facilitate intra- African trade. As such, it can also be used as a
vehicle to advocate for further development of Digital Financial Strategies across
the continent when advocating for the establishment of these institutions
C. DIGITAL GOVERNANCE
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Effective government is the cornerstone of poverty reduction and inclusive growth. Weak
capacity countries results in falling revenue mobilization and fiscal space, inefficient
targeting of public expenditures, procurement inefficiencies, and poor service delivery to
citizens. In contrast, citizens’ expectations are rising for governments to perform on par
with the service standards of the private sector. Technology adoption can be transforma-
tional in improving governance and government performance. It has the potential to boost
government efficiency, transparency, responsiveness, citizen trust, and service delivery.
In recent years, countries worldwide have improved their uptake of digitalization of go-
vernment with the objective of improving government effectiveness. The global average
for the UN e-government development index has improved from 0.47 in 2014 to 0.54 in
2018.
For years, efforts to digitalize government services have mirrored the vertical silos of the
government organization and, often, that of donors. Countries have invested in digitalizing
core government back- office processes to address challenges relative to specific govern-
ment functions, with the objective of increasing efficiency and automation of processes
(for example, integrated financial management information systems, human resources
management information systems, e-procurement, and so on). On the one hand, the silo
approach results in systems that have their own structures and which do not communica-
te with each other, resulting in reduced efficiency potential. On the other hand, it leaves
citizens and businesses dealing with multiple government entities with their own separate
processes and systems, which reduces the quality of the user experience of citizens.
A whole of government approach considers the government as one entity, which allows
for the definition of technology standards across government, the design of an enterpri-
se architecture for services, the sharing of infrastructures across different agencies or
ministries, the establishment of shared services, and the integration of systems through
system interoperability layers. The use of shared services and infrastructures contribute in
reducing the cost of investment across governmenti. For citizens, having a single govern-
ment portal, a whole of government services catalogue, with interoperable systems in
the back-end, improves user experience on access to services. In this way, citizens do
not have to deal with multiple government entities and systems to access public sector
services.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Despite advancement over the past years, according the UN e-government development
index, Africa is lagging compared to other regions. The average score for Africa increased
from 0.26 in 2014 to 0.34 in 2018. Nevertheless, only four countries (the Seychelles, Tuni-
sia, South Africa, and Mauritius) out of 54 in the African continent scored above the world
average of 0.54 in 2018, while 11 countries (Tanzania, Uganda, Seychelles, Kenya, Ethiopia,
Morocco, Ghana, Rwanda, Mauritius, Tunisia, and South Africa) scored above the world
average of 0.56 for online services. Nonetheless, disparity of e- government development
level is high among Member States of the African Union.
The political will, lack of coordinating structures among the AU member states and a
single pan African digital ID system has been the main reasons for the low levels of digital
governance.
37
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Develop Policies, Strategies, Standards and Guidelines to facilitate the deployment
of Digital Governance services
• Develop comprehensive national, regional and continental Digital Governance
strategies
• Develop a high level Enterprise Information Service Architecture (EISA). EISA to
integrate work processes and information flows with technology to achieve the
strategic objectives of each sector. EISA should promote and support inter-ope-
rability, open systems, end-user satisfaction and prudent technology invest-
ment and best practices
• Define the national and regional e-Government Inter-operability Technical Frame-
work (ITF). The ITF is to define policies and specifications for governing informa-
tion flow across Government and Regions as well as setting core standards for
data and information integration and management. The ITF should also set out
policies for establishing and implementing e- Government Metadata Standard
across the public sector
• Develop technical standards for setting requirements for the verification of the
identity of individuals and organizations during on-line Government to Government,
Government to Business, Government to Citizens and Government to Employees
• Develop a technical briefing document defining technical requirements for
assessing threats and vulnerabilities to e-Government security systems and the
taking of countermeasures for each security objective.
Deploy the essential enabling building blocks of eGovernance services
• Implement enabling eGovernance Services based on internationally recognised
standards. Allow regional and continental integration of public eServices through
common standards and open standard software tools. Develop Reference
Solutions, corresponding IT-architecture frameworks and Reference Models for
related legal requirements and implementation on a regional or continental basis
for synergies and ensuring interoperability
• Establish an entity that has the responsibility for planning and coordinating
e-Government eorts
• Establish a single digital gateway that integrates all e-Government services in
Member States in order to ease service access
• Seek regional or continental inter-government agreements to exchange and re-
use the Intellectual Property regarding eGovernance solutions, respecting the
IP of third parties
• Establish electronic government registers or digitalise existing ones, starting
with an electronic population registry, eBusiness register and Land Use register
Promote Private Public Partnerships in developing digital services
• Develop Government-to-Business Services (G2B)
• Develop Government-to-Government Services (G2G)
• Develop Government-to-Citizen Services (G2C)
38
D. DIGITAL EDUCATION
GENERAL OVERVIEW
The AU Continental Education Strategy (CESA-2016-25) strongly recommends improving
ICT capacity including use of ICTs platforms at all levels of education, to promote educati-
on access and quality; research, knowledge generation, and innovation, and take advantage
of the fourth Industrial revolution
The education sector will be critical in helping to prepare the workforce and contribute to
ensuring that these transformations are inclusive and lead to reduction of poverty and in-
equalities. In addition, there is a unique opportunity to transform the delivery of education
itself. In particular, the spread of the Internet and mobile broadband, digital platforms, di-
gital content and digital tools allows the education sector in Africa to make use of techno-
logy to expand access, improve quality, link up with international education and research
networks, and strengthen management of the sector.
Education technology can also be used to expand access to hitherto unreached popula-
tions. This is especially important for Africa where a significant number of young people
still do not complete primary and secondary schooling. Higher education is out of reach
for the vast majority: the median gross enrollment ratio in higher education is less than 10
percent in the majority of countries in Africa. As more secondary school leavers reach the
portals of traditional universities and tertiary education institutions, policy makers are for-
ced to often expand access with significantly lower quality. Digital technologies, especially
the possibility of online learning, offers the potential of vastly expanding access to postse-
condary education.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Introduction of technology in education in Africa has not generally been successful at
scale. There have been many promising pilots but scaling up has run up against challen-
ges of implementation, including technical barriers, policy and regulatory constraints, and
capacity to manage the integration of technology in education.
Connecting Africa’s universities, skills-training institutions and secondary schools with
broadband Internet is essential if the continent is to realize the potential of digital tech-
39
nologies in education. Further, all young people need to acquire digital skills at the basic
and intermediate levels if they are to use technology. Integration of digital skills training
into the core curriculum of formal education courses for all learners, irrespective of their
specialization, is essential.
Another major consideration is to equip teachers with the knowledge, skills, and confi-
dence to use technology to improve their own professional competence and the learning
of their students. If technology is to change teaching, teachers must actively espouse
it. Without addressing these factors in a concerted manner, the spread of technology in
education will encounter insurmountable barriers.
From 2008 to 2018, about 15,000 new education apps and online technologies accelera-
ting the widespread adoption of digital education. HolonIQ’s data-driven research on the
global education market estimates that about US$152 billion has been invested in these
technologies, and it is projected to more than double to US$342 billion by 2023.
With the surge in education technology products, new digital technologies constantly
appear in the marketplace, making it difficult for policy makers to assess the pros and
cons of different approaches. The taxonomy elaborated here unbundles promising digital
technologies and organizes these into clusters as a way of framing opportunities to lever-
age technology in teaching, learning and administration. Countries can review, assess, and
implement specific technologies carefully taking into account educational goals, expected
outcomes, and country-specific contexts.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Promote the use of ICTs for both formal and informal Education
• Modernize current curricula to exploit ICTs for learning purposes.
• Initiate drives to identify already developed educational content earmarking it
for localized content.
• Encourage and make more a ordable the access of educational institutions
to the Internet.
• Encourage the development of Africa’s specific eLearning and computer-based
training (CBT).
• Support the proliferation of virtual universities and educational institutions
• Make use of the massive amount of online, mostly free -- educational content
from the best universities or professional institutions in their fields already
exists (MOOCs).
• Promote the use of educational Websites that provide support to formal education.
• Encourage and foster ICT R&D through the establishment of a university portal
or network.
• Develop e-learning portals and e-Libraries
• Support and encourage the development of eLearning and CBT for informal
educational subjects
• Encourage the development of locally relevant informal educational material
40
• Encourage the use of ICTs to encourage lifelong learning
• Promote the use of citizen guides in various areas as part of general education
and knowledge (legal, medical, education and other issues)
• Use radio and TV for the improvement of informal educational levels.
Improve both formal and informal Education in ICTs
• Spread the learning of ICTs at all educational levels: primary, secondary, voca-
tional training and university.
• Identify the required ICT literacy levels for various educational levels
• Incorporate ICT training as part of the pre-service and in-service training of all
teachers to support their ability to effectively use ICTs in their teaching practice
• Encourage the use of already established ICT training material to avoid the local
redevelopment of the same.
• Encourage and support ICT training institutes through promotion, incentives
and exemptions.
• Encourage the involvement of the ICT sector in formal ICT education.
• Encourage continued ICT education and professional development.
• Encourage the introduction of certification and the accreditation of institutes
that provide certification training
• Improve informal ICT skills for citizens through media such as radio and TV.
• Raise awareness of the importance of informal ICT education through
eLearning, the web and computer based training (CBT)
• Provide age-appropriate exposure to ICTs and related content to ensure safe
online experiences.
• Provide necessary media and information literacy skills, competencies and
attitudes that support digital skills, digital hygiene, critical thinking, inter-cultural
competencies; content evaluation and awareness of the visible and unknown
consequences of actions by users for themselves and on the rights of others.
Raise Public Awareness of ICTs
• Encourage the media to allocate time for news about general technological
development, ICT educational programs and ICT progress in Africa.
• Encourage national awards in ICTs and related technologies.
• Host continental and international ICT exhibitions and conferences.
• Maintain a constant vigil on the benefits already reaped by ICTs for social and
economic development.
41
E. DIGITAL HEALTH
GENERAL OVERVIEW
The vision for the Africa Health Strategy 2016-2030 is an integrated, inclusive and prospe-
rous Africa free from its heavy burden of disease, disability and premature death. This is
expected to be realized by building an effective, African-driven response to reduce the
burden of disease through strengthened health systems, scaled-up health interventions,
inter-sectoral action and empowerment of communities.
One of the strategic objectives of the Africa Health Strategy 2016-2030 is strengthening
health research, innovation, ICTs for health, technological capabilities and developing sus-
tainable evidence informed solutions for Africa’s health challenges;
A digitally enabled health system is expected to contribute to Sustainable Development
Goal 3 to ensure good health and wellbeing for all at all ages. Universal access to affor-
dable high-speed broadband communications technology promises to assist the health
system to provide higher quality and more patient-focused care, especially in rural and
remote areas, by giving health workers access to tools that allow them to do more, make
better decisions, and draw on resources previously only available in major urban centers.
It also promises to put patients firmly in control of their own health data and contribute to
improved security of this data.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Digital health shows great promise in supporting health system transformation. Positive
trends include (a) greater recognition of the importance of digital technology and the need
for government leadership, including from the Ministry of Health (MOH), in the process;
(b) reduced barriers, especially in the availability of mobile devices, including smartphones,
decreasing hardware costs, and better network connectivity; and (c) a focus on integration
and interoperability of digital health solutions, including the importance of standards and a
focus on scale, and increased awareness of the need for harmonized approaches.
42
The complex systems required to integrate and manage a across a multifaceted health
system, including primary, secondary and tertiary health, patient data and health insurance
can only be done effectively on a digital basis (see diagram below)
INTEGRATED NATIONAL DIGITAL HEALTH SYSTEM
Management TELEMEDICINE SYSTEM Private Clinic Schedule me-
PRIMARY
System Systems dical appoint-
(AND CHW)
Clinical System & ments, remin-
Electronic Patient ders via SMS
Record
Management Private Hospital
HOSPITAL System Systems PUBLIC
PORTAL
Access to health
promotion
Health Insurance HEALTH information,
INSURANCE System statistics, and
financial and
performance
Surveillance Disease data for the
PUBLIC System (CD / NCD) Registries health system
HEALTH
Management
REGION /
System
DISTRICT
Central System Human Drugs / Supplies
CENTRAL Resources System
While there has been progress on digital health in Africa, substantial barriers remain
because the foundation elements have not been adequately addressed. Barriers to sca-
ling up of digital health interventions include: (a) weak infrastructure and device access,
including reliable electricity and affordable high-speed broadband connectivity, especially
in rural areas; (b) a lack of sufficient and consistent funding for digital health programs; (c)
limited human resource capacity and digital skills.
and
activity
data
patient
information
Anonymous
Notifiable
disease
information
Claims
informations
Disease
registry
info
Information on
births and deaths
to CRVS agency
Patient data Management data Insurance data
43
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Support the development of the necessary prerequisite elements to realize the full
potential of digital health that responds to national health priorities and drives pro-
gress toward universal health coverage
• Develop a digital health strategy that lays out a compelling vision and provides
clear direction to health system stakeholders. Assess the health needs of a
country and consider how digital health solutions can address them.
• Establish a strong leadership, intersectoral collaboration between ICT and
health by putting in place an intersectoral governance system with an action-
oriented taskforce that advocates, advises, builds the capacity and monitors
digital health initiatives
• Establish a robust monitoring and evaluation framework and harmonize key per-
formance indicator (KPI) frameworks across digital health initiatives
Put in place regulations and policies needed to protect patient personal data and
privacy to foster trust in digital health solutions and facilitate their adoption while
allowing innovation to continue to unfold
• Develop appropriate data privacy and data-quality policies and regulations to
enable digital health systems to support Universal Health Coverage
• Evaluate opportunities to improve healthcare delivery supported by digital
health solutions and assess existing healthcare delivery regulations within
Member States and adapt them as needed to enable the delivery of new he-
althcare services
• Define policies for teleconsultations and e-prescriptions, thus allowing smooth
integration with current clinical practices and address the ethical concerns of
professional medical bodies and patients by communicating the benefits and
limitations of teleconsultations
Ensure interoperability to allow the integration and leveraging of different digital
health solutions and data sources among government programs, hospitals, commu-
nity health workers and patients
• Make interoperability a strategic priority and be identified in the national digital
health strategy as a prerequisite for the success of digital health initiatives
• Set up a standards and interoperability taskforce to oversee standards-selection
and interoperability issues and help define the approach toward interoperability
in Member States taking relevant use cases into account
• Create a continental standard for the portability and accessibility of medical
information to be adhered to by Member States
• Make use of existing interoperability profiles and base standards: Most stan-
dards that might be need already exist, but bringing them together in the right
way is complex
44
F. DIGITAL AGRICULTURE
GENERAL OVERVIEW
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Africa is pro-
jected to be home to about 2 billion people by 2050. This population increase adds to the
mounting demand for food and soaring food prices. Therefore, farm productivity must
accelerate at a faster rate than the global average to avoid continued mass hunger. Obvi-
ously, sustainable solutions for decent employment in agriculture in Africa must address
the intertwined issues of minimizing drudgery, while maximizing returns to effort, which
could be achieved through harnessing opportunities in agribusiness entrepreneurships,
and innovations to enhance productivity and competitiveness.
Considering agriculture as an essential driver of economic development and an area of
great opportunities for people in Africa, harnessing opportunities in agribusiness entre-
preneurship and innovations, including in ICT innovations, along the value chain, contribu-
tes to improving the sector’s image, increases productivity and returns to investment and
provides new employment opportunities, hence attracting more young people. Access to
cheaper and more reliable ICT devices, particularly mobile phones, and increased connec-
tivity in Africa is already an opportunity for adoption.
Digital technology opens vast untapped potential for farmers, investors, and entrepreneurs
to improve the efficiency of food production and consumption in Africa. From precision
farming to an efficient food supply chain, technology could bring major economic, social,
and environmental benefits. Indeed, the sheer optimism across the startup ecosystem is
that extreme hunger can be sharply reduced in Africa, in this generation, by significantly
transforming the industry that employs most of its citizens
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Three characteristics of Africa’s food system make it well-suited to benefit from digital
technologies. First, the food system is large and complex, with many dispersed actors.
Digital technology has the potential to connect Africa’s hundreds of millions of rural
inhabitants, many of them farmers, with the emerging trillion-dollar African food market.
Digital technologies can connect upstream input suppliers – whether suppliers of seed,
machinery, fertilizer, finance, or advisory services – with farms and farm enterprises. And
digital technologies can link food buyers and sellers more efficiently, both within countries
and across borders.
45
OPPORTTUNITIES ACROSS DIGITAL AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT
CONTINUUM (NASCENT, TRANSITIONAL, ADVANCED SYSTEM)
HIGH
Remote Sensing (in Production forecas-
MOBILE
situ and diagnostic) ting and optimization
ACCESS
Mobile payment e-Commerce Farm-to-fork uberized Blockchains for value chain
Mobile marketing food system (from fertil- / food safety traceabillity
plattforms lizers to food) (cold chain monitoring)
(Safaricom-digifarm)
B2B data analytics fintech Farm Robotics and farm
equipment tracking
Ag observatory
Precision agriculture
e-Pest and
Mobile weather alerts Disease
Mobile based exten- surveillance Cloud-based agriculture di-
sion (SMS, Apps) system gital marketplace platforms Automated farm machinary
Price forecasting
Weather index insurance /
E-mechanization (Hello remote sensing
tractor)
Solar-powered Smart
Irrigation System
Partial traceabillity and
supply chain tracking
Off-line advisory ser-
vices using audio and
video tools (tablets)
Portable soil testers
Farm management software Field
Monitoring Platforms (IoT) Smart
Farmer information and adaptive irrigation
services through video E-agriculture
(Digital Green) statistics
LOW
MOBILE
ACCESS
LOW INTERNET HIGH INTERNET
CONNECTIVITY CONNECTIVITY
Source: World Bank. 2019. Scaling Up Disruptive Agriculture Technologies in Africa,
Advisory Services and Analytics, currently under review.
Second, vast inefficiencies in resource use and marketing represent an opportunity for
digital technologies to transform African farming. Food production is risky due, in part, to
limited information about weather patterns, soil characteristics, future market demand,
and other variables.
Third, Africa’s food system is characterized by inequalities in access to technologies,
information, and markets that digital innovations can help to overcome. Even in poorly-
connected rural contexts, sophisticated off-line digital agricultural technologies can provide
opportunities to help illiterate farmers. Digital agricultural information platforms or mobile
finance solutions can level the playing field for marginalized groups, such as women, who
traditionally have lower access to information and markets. Farmer identification programs
can help to better target vulnerable farmers with support services.
46
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Create conducive environment to foster the development of digital agriculture
• Improve rural digital infrastructure: foster competition in telecoms to boost rural
coverage and lower costs
• Develop digital agrifinance services: for example, e-vouchers for direct benefit
transfers and incentives for farmers and other agribusiness SMEs, and impro-
ved access to finance for startup and early-stage agritech enterprises
Provide farmers with reliable marketing information that helps them reach their
markets more effectively, at lower cost and with wider opportunities
• Support agricultural digital platforms: for example, digital farm registries, digital
marketing platforms and agricultural observatories
• Enhance agricultural digital skills and literacy: for example, provide targeted
training for farmers, particularly for women, and extension agents
• Empowering women in agriculture using ICTs. advice provided y
Promote the deployment of digital solutions in Agriculture
• Implement digital solutions to schedule sprinkler irrigation systems and enhan-
ce the quality and productivity of land and eventually increase farmers‘ incomes
• Deploy eAgriculture information systems with content such as on health,
nutrition and educational advice which can empower women by addressing
the multiple responsibilities they have in caring for families as well as farming.
Using Mobile telephony for sending and saving money enables rural woman to
have some sort of autonomy over their finances.
• Implement traceability solutions to be able to respond to the quality standard
requirements and help large buyers track, manage, pay, and reward small pro-
ducers
47
IX. CROSS CUTTING THEMES
A. DIGITAL CONTENT AND APPLICATIONS
GENERAL OVERVIEW
The Extraordinary Session of the African Union Conference of Ministers in charge of
Communications and Information Technologies (CITMC) held in Johannesburg in 2009
acknowledged the benefits of the dotAfrica domain name to Africa and adopted a resolu-
tion (in the Olivier Tambo Declaration) to „Establish dot Africa as a continental Top-Level
Domain for use by organizations, businesses and individuals with guidance from African
Internet agencies“.
Furthermore, the Addis Ababa Declaration on Information Communication Technologies
adopted by the Summit of the African Union Heads of State and Government held in
Addis Ababa in January-February 2010 [Doc. Assembly/AU/11(XIV)] directed the Commis-
sion to promote better utilization and management of critical internet resources.
Digital content provides a vital alternate view of looking at digital technology from the
point of view of the end user and not the view of the hardware, network and service
engineers and providers. Digital developments derive their value from the content they
deliver or enable for users. It is thus important for this content to be both locally relevant
and of high quality to stimulate demand for improved and more tailored delivery and ex-
pertise. Digital content also inevitably brings change in all spheres of development, raises
new challenges and can have significant impacts on social, economic and political develop-
ments. Consequently, it is important to consider the role and effect of digital content in
the digital transformation of the continent.
Country Code Top Level Domains (ccTLDs) and the Africa Top Level Domain (dotAfrica)
promote and support the development of the local internet ecosystem and hence needs
to be supported. In this regard, the Addis Ababa Declaration on Information Commu-
nication Technologies adopted by the Summit of the African Union Heads of State and
Government held in Addis Ababa in January-February 2010 [Doc. Assembly/AU/11(XIV)]
directed the Commission to promote better utilization and management of critical inter-
net resources. Furthermore The Extraordinary Session of the African Union Conference
of Ministers in charge of Communications and Information Technologies (CITMC) held in
Johannesburg in 2009 acknowledged the benefits of the dotAfrica domain name to Africa
and adopted a resolution (in the Olivier Tambo Declaration) to „Establish dot Africa as a
continental Top-Level Domain for use by organizations, businesses and individuals with
guidance from African Internet agencies“.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
There are 216 million active Social Media Users in Africa10, yet, the vast majority of con-
tent accessed by users in Africa is hosted overseas. This content must traverse interna-
tional links that are often expensive and sometimes under provisioned, which can have a
significant impact on the economics of access as well as the user experience. While there
has been some effort in recent years to increase the amount of locally produced content,
it is equally important to develop an effective environment to encourage the local hosting
of content, by local content developers as well as international content delivery networks,
as part of efforts to develop the local Internet ecosystem.
10 We Are Social. Hootsuite. Digital 2019
48
Currently, there is a modest uptake of the Country Code Top Level Domains (ccTLDs) and
dotAfrica (.africa) domain name in the African Registrar Market. The lack of locally hosted
content can have significant impacts on the entire Internet ecosystem in a country. First,
accessing any type of content abroad can be costly for Internet Service Providers and the-
refore, international links are typically under- provisioned, resulting in slow access times
that limit usage. Second, the high costs for accessing international content are passed
on to users, with high prices acting to limit usage. Finally, these limits on demand will, in
turn, restrict the creation of more Internet content, keeping the entire ecosystem under-
developed. Hosting more content locally would not only lower costs, but also improve the
quality of service. Lowering latency will increase consumption of existing websites, and
also encourage the creation and take-up of new services and applications. For instance,
some services, such as VoIP and video streaming, are directly dependent on a fast and
reliable network to function.
It is critical that users have access to content that is locally relevant and locally hosted.
There is a distinction between locally relevant content and locally hosted content because
most, if not all, countries in Africa already produce locally relevant content, but it is not
always available online or hosted locally, which has an impact on usage.
Furthermore, increasingly, individuals, organizations and communities are using digital
technologies to document and express what they value and what they want to pass on
to future generations. There is therefore need to preserve the African heritage in digital
format, and its relevant Intellectual property rights. Promoting the penetration and use
of ICTs into local communities using African languages including codification programs
and encouraging the development of local and relevant content-based applications is also
essential.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Establish a conducive policy and legal framework
• Promote local content development as a government policy priority
• Ensure legal and policy clarity for local content developers, hosting providers,
content delivery networks, and other relevant stakeholders
• Create a harmonised content regulation framework and shared standards of
practices for content dissemination
• Develop legislative and regulatory measure that combat the use online plat-
forms for the dissemination of content that compromises the dignity and rights
of citizens
• Develop mechanisms to identify child exploitation images and design a repor-
ting system linked to law enforcement agencies
• Develop regulations to cover all platforms for content dissemination to ensure
the multinational contribute to local content development through funding and
skills development
• Review local content quotas to apply to all distribution platforms including the
over the top services Consider regulations that will enforce reciprocity of natio-
nal content in the parent countries of Audio -Visual content companies
• Review copyright legislation to align to digital environment for content produc-
tion and distribution to protect African content Access to broadband infras-
tructure for audio visual content including infrastructure for content production
49
The marketing strategies for content to other contents given the oversupply of
western countries in the continent or use the multilateral agreement and global
treaties on the unfair practices of Multilateral especially in African countries
• Develop regulation on contracts for the supply of online/digital content.
• Revise copyright legislation to align with the digital environment for content
production and distribution in order to protect African content
• Promote access to broadband infrastructure for audiovisual content, including
content production infrastructure
• Utilize the multilateral agreement and global treaties on unfair multilateral
practices, especially in African countries
• Encourage actions to protect the environment through the management of
electronic waste
Support multistakeholder, partnerships and marketing activities
• Conduct multi-stakeholder local content forums to raise awareness on local
hosting benefits, discuss issues, and identify market solutions
• Development of partnerships with government or industry bodies to ensure
training for data- centre employees is complete and up to date to meet expec-
tations and services levels demanded by the industry
• Tailor and market hosting products and services by local data centres to more
closely match the needs of the African content market, particularly the growing
market in smaller websites
• Promote wider implementation of data measurement tools and techniques
by relevant stakeholders, including ISPs and content developers, to improve
understanding and management of the dynamics of content hosting
• Encourage content developers on the performance and potential business
benefits of local hosting, in addition to cost considerations
• Promote advertising of existing and new local data-centre capabilities
• Mobilize and capacitate Accredited Registrars in Africa and develop future
growth strategies with the aim of growing the African ccTLD’s and dotAfrica
(.africa)
• Encourage the use of .africa by all AU M-S and African communities and societies
• Call on the AU Commission to migrate their portal and website to .africa
utilizing au.africa or auc.africa
50
B. DIGITAL ID
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Identify forms the basis of human activity and is a “right”. The benefits of a legal identity
include gender equality, social protection delivery, financial inclusion, improved gover-
nance, safer migration, superior health delivery, enhanced and refugee child protection,
reducing statelessness, and better access to land and property rights. The United Nations
concept of “legal identity for all”11 supports the attainment of the SDGs and Agenda 2063:
The Africa we want.
Digital ID or the digitalization of identity is the unique identification of individuals through
a digital channel. The benefits of Digital ID cuts across not only the entire spectrum of the
social and economic domains but also human rights. Digital ID forms a key mechanism for
furthering the United Nations concept of “legal identity for all” and supports the attain-
ment of the SDGs and Agenda 2063: The Africa we want.
Digital ID can form the basis of a foundational ID as part of civil registration and on which
other functional elements such as national ID, refugee ID, non-resident ID, etc. can be
“stacked” or built. By digitalizing ID and in particular using biometrics (fingerprint, iris, faci-
al recognition, etc.) the ability to both positively and uniquely identify individuals becomes
a reality in a way that paper-based identification cannot achieve.
Several African Union Member States are taking advantage of rapid advances in digital
technology to establish national digital ID platforms or systems, a vital component of the
digital economy, without which full participation in Africa’s emerging digital economy will
be impossible.
The drive for digital ID is in recognition of the fact that the economy in Africa must evolve
or even transform in order to achieve sustainable, inclusive growth. Therefore, digitaliza-
tion is a key enabler, which would allow African citizens to participate in the digital econo-
my, and especially empower women and the excluded. A standards-based Digital ID pro-
vides regional integration in support of AfCFTA by enabling a trusted flow of data across
borders. However, it does require a holistic and harmonized approach based on standards
and principles and supporting the development of strategies and policies, including inter-
operability and scalability.
The infrastructure for Digital ID exists and is growing. This includes internet coverage, se-
curity, biometric technology, smart devices, and cloud services. The trend in each of these
areas is for improved service and performance at a lower cost. As such, the foundational
digital infrastructure that supports digital ID is continuously growing in reach and dropping
in cost. Africa is experiencing the fastest growth in internet usage rates, with a 20 percent
increase each year. Seven countries in Africa have “affordable internet.”12
Most people in Africa access the internet via a smartphone, and the price of smartphones
fell by 20 to 30 percent in most emerging economies between 2008 and 2016. Also, the
average selling price of a fingerprint sensor found in a mobile phone fell by 30 percent in
2017 alone.13 All these improvements mean the technology needed for digital ID is not
only available now but is more affordable than ever. This situation makes it possible for
African countries to leapfrog paper-based approaches to identification.
11 The United Nations Legal Identity Agenda 2020- 2030 (UN LIA), backed by the Deputy Secretary-General, was launched as a One UN
approach to support of Member States building holistic, country-owned, sustainable civil registration, vital statistics and identity
management systems. Building on existing systems and structures, these UN LIA’s efforts to reduce the global identity gap will be
closely coordinated across shared value sectors in health and proven interventions aimed at accelerating progress towards Sustai-
nable Development Goal target 16.9—legal identity for all, including birth registration—and SDG 17.19.
12 Alliance for Affordable Internet. 2018 Africa Regional Snapshot
13 Chris Burt, “Fingerprint Cards reports cost cutting and changing focus after tough 2017,” BiometricUpdate.com, February 9, 2018;
Danny Thakkar, Biometric devices: Cost, types, and comparative analysis, Bayometric.
51
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
A large number of Africa’s citizens have no legal means of identification. Comprehensive
civil registration forms the basis of a well-functioning Civil Registration and Vital Statistics
(CRVS) system. However, many of the civil registration and identification systems in African
Union Member States are fragmented and under-resourced. This has led to the current situa-
tion where about 542 million people in Africa do not have a foundational identification and
therefore are “invisible.” Of this number, around 95 million children under five have never
had their births recorded, and 120 million children do not have a birth certificate.
The lack of identities implies that about half of the continent’s population are not only
disempoweredfrom meaningfully participating in the productive process to generate
economic growth, but are also inhibited from accessing various services to improve their
well-being. Citizens who do not have legal identity have difficulty asserting their rights, in-
cluding their rights of citizenship. Legal identity can spur innovation and entrepreneurship
by reducing transactions cost and enhancing traceability of products. Legal identity can
also strengthen the capacity of state institutions and their ability to deliver essential social
services to the citizenry.
The rapid modernization and urbanization of African14 societies and the increasing sophisti-
cation of commercial transactions are increasing the need for legal identity. ID is required
to obtain health services, tax certificates, travel documents, open bank accounts, exercise
franchise, establish credit, etc. Further, conflicts in Africa have resulted in the internal dis-
placement of large numbers of people, all of who need humanitarian assistance. Without
legal identity, it has been difficult to deliver humanitarian assistance to them and to repatri-
ate them to their communities/countries following the cessation of hostilities.
In a 2017 study, nearly one in five people without a bank account identified the reason as
the lack of necessary identification documents. In low-income countries, women dispro-
portionately lack identification, which contributes to their higher levels of exclusion. For
example, 45 percent of women over the age of 15 lack identification in low-income count-
ries, compared with only 30 percent of men.15
Despite the opportunities digitalization presents, there is more to be done to enable the
main drivers of digitalization in Africa. Only a few African countries have made progress
in developing digital ID systems as a basis for legal ID, and to exploit the digital econo-
my. Further, after almost 25 years of ICT development on the continent, for many African
countries ICT readiness (infrastructure & access), ICT use, and ICT capability (skills) is still
low but rising, per the trends in the International Telecommunications Union’s ICT De-
velopment Index. Internet penetration averages 20 percent, but with wide variations from
90 percent to 3 percent, while only 7 percent of African households subscribed to high-
speed internet services at the end of 201716. Similarly, mobile penetration was estimated
at 44 percent in 201717.
Further, digital ID and the digital economy thrive on trust. Data privacy breaches, cyber-at-
tacks, and cyber-fraud around the world are on the rise, impacting on productivity, reve-
nue, and client trust in the digital economy. While digital ID is designed to mitigate the low
levels of trust in the digital economy (and e-commerce in particular), a high level of trust
is equally required for digital ID systems to succeed; i.e., trust in the ID issuing authority,
in the design of the ID and in the technology18. It is essential, therefore that African Union
Member States have adequate regulation; particularly around data governance and digital
platforms, to ensure that trust is preserved in the digitalization.
14 Urban societies are known to be characterized by higher levels of impersonal transactions and lower levels of trust. A legal identity
minimizes the constraint on market transactions arising from low trust in an impersonal environment.
15 ID4D-Findex survey data 2017, World Bank
16 ITU 2018
17 GSMA 2018 for sub-Saharan Africa
18 There has to be trust that the data will not be breached by outsiders and that the state will not use the data for nefarious purposes
52
It is equally essential that further digitization takes into account continental aspirations
such as the „free movement of people“ and the AfCFTA, which should facilitate the crea-
tion of a common digital single market. This is a reminder of the need to ensure interope-
rability of digital platforms such as digital identification and payment systems, and therefore
harmonization of standards.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Ensure inclusion, security, privacy and data ownership in digital identity systems
• Develop legal and regulatory frameworks covering data privacy, security, and
user rights
• Design and implement digital identity systems that are inclusive and with the
rights and interests of Africa’s citizens at the center
• Design and implement digital identity systems that incorporate strong security
• Design and implement digital identity systems that empower individuals and
protect online privacy as a fundamental right
• Ensure Digital identity data belongs to, and remains in the control of Africans.
Support interoperability and neutrality of digital identity systems
• Put in place regulatory systems and policies to ensure interoperability
• Establish a continental interoperable and open digital identity, allowing valida-
tion and authentication of individuals
• Promote standards and enable Member States to adopt no propriety architec-
tures that offer free access and control of their ID related information and data,
with potential for a seamless interoperability of IDs across Africa.
• The African Union Commission, the Regional Economic Communities and the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, and relevant implementing
partners to work together on continental and regional standards, including on
authentication protocols, minimum data fields, deduplication protocols, biome-
tric formats as well as other formats, model regulations, and other standards
• Design and implement digital identity systems using open standards
C. EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Digitalization, automation and Artificial Intelligence (AI) are bringing new unprecedented
dimension of prosperity for humanity. Emerging technologies such as blockchain, artificial
intelligence, Internet of things, 3D printing, etc. provide practical ways of applying them
to perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence. These disruptive technologies are
spawning a myriad of services to citizens and therefore positively impact their daily lives
by changing the way they take care of themselves, feed themselves and even the way of
communication. They can, however, be a stalemate for security, health and also disrupt
our economies and destroy lives over generations.
The Internet of Things and the Internet of Nano Things, often referred to respectively as
IoT and IoNT, describe new connected devices that range from wearable technology like
53
smart watches to connected (Nano) sensors used in manufacturing, transportation, health
and agriculture in a growing trend that seeks to bring technology to every sector.
Recent global estimates indicate that IoT devices will number 22 billion by the year 2022
meaning that in the near future, IoT devices could be the main interface used online to
communicate, shop and interact on the Internet by users in Africa and across the world. IoT
and IoNT bring the promise of global economic opportunities and new innovations that will
transform the way we work, live and play.
The driving force behind this accelerating change is a shift from physical to digital and from
firm-based to network-based business models. Africa should not miss potentials offered by
emerging technologies to transform itself and make the 21st century the Africa’s century.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
If utilized well, new and emerging technologies could provide some of the biggest oppor-
tunities to enterprises, but they will also present challenges. They pose risks and questi-
ons not only to business but to society as a whole. Planning for how to deal with these
emerging technologies and where value can be derived while assessing potential risks
before they become a fully-fledged reality is essential for businesses that want to thrive
in the world of 5G, AI, Big Data and IoT. We cannot yet know all the implications of these
innovations but businesses will need to predict and plan for how these technologies will
disrupt them and their industry.
Regulation of emerging technologies in Africa is also a problem that requires swift action,
the preeminent issue now and in the future is how to protect citizens and ensure fair mar-
kets while allowing the emerging technologies and businesses flourish. Although these
innovations have contributed to the digital space, they have also raised legal and regula-
tory concerns. AU Member States will need to explore ways in which emerging techno-
logies can be harnessed to support digital transformation, while putting in place the legal
framework to protect users and the society at large.
Recognizing the potential of emerging technologies and the impact that policy and regula-
tory frameworks can have on their success, countries and their regulators should encoura-
ge a regulatory paradigm that pushes frontiers and enables digital transformation.
As emerging technologies evolve, regulators in Africa will need to rethink their approa-
ches, adopting models that are agile, iterative, and collaborative to face the challenges
posed by emerging technologies and the fourth Industrial Revolution.
Currently in Africa, emerging technologies are unregulated. The preeminent issue now and
tomorrow is how to protect citizens and ensure fair markets while allowing the emerging
technologies and businesses flourish.
The reality of this new digital age is that Government has to keep pace with technology in
order to play the role that it must with any industry: to ensure that the playing field is level
and open to all, to set and enforce the rules of the road, and to protect the public from any
negative effects of these advances.
The ever-growing network of physical objects that feature an IP address for internet con-
nectivity, and the communication that occurs between these objects and other Internet-
enabled devices and systems is becoming a reality of the digital ecosystem. More devices
are being manufactured IP-ready and can be connected to platforms that enable them to
collect and send data. The ability to transfer data over a network without requiring human-
to-human or human-to-computer interaction needs to be planned for as Africa moves into
the 4th Industrial Revolution [Internet of Things].
54
Furthermore, the ability of computer systems to perform tasks normally requiring human
intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision-making, and translati-
on between languages is evolving over time and already exists in some parts of the world
[Artificial Intelligence]. Blockchain technology has also developed very rapidly over the last
few years and has challenged traditional systems of creating, holding and sharing informa-
tion and records. Its applications have ranged from creation of Crypto-currencies such as
Bitcoins and others, to the development of “smart contracts” and other forms of record
keeping. The applications of Blockchain has been productive and put to good economic
use, but similarly, it has been used for criminal activity as Blockchains allow people’s iden-
tity to be concealed. AU Member States will need to explore ways in which Blockchains
technologies can be harnessed to support digital transformation, while putting in place the
legal framework to protect users and the society at large.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Promote policies and regulations that address emerging technologies with regard
to how best to protect citizens, ensure fair markets and enforce regulations while
allowing new technologies and business to thrive
• Rethink regulatory approaches and adopt models that are agile, iterative, and
collaborative to face the challenges posed by emerging technologies and the
fourth Industrial Revolution
• Develop policies that address the spectrum issues around emerging techno-
logies in general including the development of a 5G and AI strategy; and IoT
devices in particular.
• Develop outcome-based regulations and test new models in sandboxes
Establish coordination mechanisms among relevant sectors
• Coordinate the establishment of national and regional taskforces to research
into secure Emerging technologies and propose guidelines that will educate
Internet users on how to identify secure IoT devices
• Improve coordination among sectoral regulation
• Promote human rights-based ethical reflection, research and public dialogue on
the implications of new and emerging technologies and their potential societal
impacts.
• Encourage public and private sector to embrace the emerging technologies
(Block chain, Artificial Intelligence…)
D. CYBERSECURITY, PRIVACY AND PERSONAL
DATA PROTECTION
GENERAL OVERVIEW
As Member States of the African Union increase access to broadband connectivity, they
are becoming more interconnected and vulnerable to cyber-attacks. It becomes critical to
reinforce our human and institutional capacity to secure our cyberspace by building trust
and confidence in the use of cyber technologies. In today’s digital world, personal data
have also become the fuel that drives much of current online activities.
The AU Executive Council at its 32nd Ordinary Session held from 25- 26 January 2018, in
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia adopted decision EX.CL/Dec.987(XXXII) in which it endorsed the
55
AU Declaration on Internet Governance and development of digital economy and adopted
Cyber Security as a flagship project of the African Union Agenda 2063.
Furthermore, the AU 23rd Assembly of Heads of State and Government adopted the
African Union “Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection”. This conven-
tion also known as the Malabo Convention seeks for a common approach at continental
level on the security of the cyberspace and to set up minimum standards and procedures
to define a credible digital environment for developing the electronic communications and
guarantee the respect of the privacy online. The convention is now open to all Member
States of the African Union for signature and ratification in conformity with their respecti-
ve constitutional procedures and subsequently the convention shall enter into force thirty
(30) days after the date of the receipt by the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union of the fifteenth (15th) instrument of ratification.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
The incidents and threat of cyber breaches, and the spread of viruses and malware is
pervasive.
Given the global threat, a comprehensive and consistent response is required. Only by
raising the awareness of the public, educating businesses on cybersecurity, collaborating
with industry groups and associations and encouraging cybersecurity firms and services,
can the enormous threat be mitigated. Without trust, the digital economy cannot flourish.
Every day, large amounts of data are collected, stored and transmitted across the globe.
According to Africa Cybersecurity Report 201819 , cybercrimes cost African economies
$3.5 billion in 2017. In 2018, annual losses to cybercrimes were estimated for Nigeria at
$649 million, and Kenya at $210 million. Likewise, according to the South African Banking
Risk Information Centre (SABRIC), South Africa loses $157 million annually to cyber-at-
tacks. . The continent faces a severe shortage of cybersecurity manpower. It is estimated
that Africa will have a shortage of 100,000 cybersecurity personnel by 202020
As more and more economic and social activities shift into connected information spaces,
volumes of trans-border data flows, specifically personal data are increasing, thus making
data protection regulations critical.
CYBERCRIME COST IN AFRICA BY INDUSTRY (2017)
Bank & financial services 23%
Government 19%
e-Commerce 16%
Mobile-based transactions 13%
Telecommunications 11%
Other sectors/industries 18%
Source: Africa Cyber Security Report 2017, Serianu
19 https://www.serianu.com/downloads/SaccoCyberSecurityReport2018.pdf
20 https://portswigger.net/daily-swig/how-africa-is-tackling-its-cybersecurity-skills-gap.
56
The African Union Commission is committed to work closely with Regional Economic
Communities and international specialized Institutions to provide guidance to African
Union Member States on cybercrime and cyber security policies National cybersecurity
strategy, legal and regulatory frameworks, and human and institutional capacity represent
a foundational block for building a cyber-resilient digital economy and society. The cyber-
security strategy sets an overall direction and introduces selectivity in the protection of
critical national assets; legal and regulatory frameworks establish a rule of law governing
the cyberspace that is global in nature and therefore requiring global collaboration and co-
ordination resulting in global and regional conventions and agreements; and human and in-
stitutional capacity ensures that local and regional capabilities exist in the various areas of
cybersecurity expertise. Therefore, it is important to introduce these crosscutting enablers
before diving deeper into sector specific cybersecurity strengthening measures.
The incidents and threat of cyber breaches, and the spread of viruses and malware is per-
vasive. Given the global threat, a comprehensive and consistent response is required. Only
by raising the awareness of the public, educating businesses on cybersecurity, collaborating
with industry groups and associations and encouraging cybersecurity firms and services,
can the enormous threat be mitigated. Without trust, the digital economy cannot flourish.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Support interventions to strengthen cybersecurity at national level:
• Develop and adopt national cybersecurity strategies and legal and regulatory
framework for personal data protection/privacy, cybersecurity standards and
governance, and cybercrime
• Establish national cyber-security governance structures under multi-stakeholder
structures (involving policy makers, economic, educational, technical and busi-
ness communities, legal, law enforcement, Academia, diplomatic, military ...etc.)
• Promote human and institution capacity building (public awareness campaign,
professional training, R&D, Computer Emergency Response Teams, CERTs, etc.)
• Conduct capacity building of policy makers and law enforcement to strengthen
cyber security
• Develop national policies/ strategies on network information security
• Establish mechanisms to combat falsified content (fake news) and curb sharing
of non-factual information
• Support the development and implementation of strong encryption to help
keep Internet users safe online by protecting the integrity and confidentiality of
their data and communications
• Consider internet routing security as a fundamental building block of digital
security
• Strengthen legislation on personal data for better control of personal data by
their owner;
• Accelerate the establishment of Personal Data Protection Authorities;
• Make the Malabo Convention consistent with standards such as the moderni-
zed convention 108, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) to promote
competitiveness of African companies outside the continent;
57
• Adopt a law on the localization of data with respect for the privacy of African
citizens and residents;
• Adopt legislation to regulate social networks;
• Adopt legislative and regulatory measures to combat the use of online plat-
forms for the dissemination of content that violates human dignity and citizens‘
rights
• Put in place mechanisms to identify exploitative images of children and design
an alert system directly connected to law enforcement agencies.
Support interventions to strengthen cybersecurity at regional and continental level
• Establish a framework on Data Policy and management for Africa
• Establish framework and mechanism for regional cooperation and mutual assis-
tance;
• Support the signing and ratification of the Malabo Convention;
• Develop incident reporting and information sharing frameworks among National
CERTS in Member States.
• Establish regional CERT and forensic labs
• Set up regional centers of excellence for training and research
• Ensure commercial rights of the use of personal data of Africa’s citizens staying
in Africa or provide a fair commercial share to Africa.
• Support the UN-led process for the establishment of the Global Cybersecurity
Framework under the UN
• The digital economy that the draft strategy wants to develop and promote can-
not be conceived in the absence of a trustworthy environment in which electro-
nic certification is a key factor. Therefore there is a need to establish electronic
certification schemes and mutual recognition mechanisms in Africa
• Steer innovations at continental level that seek to address challenges related to
cybersecurity, interoperability of systems, and persistency of information
• Strengthen cooperation between African Union bodies and the authorities for
the protection of personal data;
58
E. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL OVERVIEW
It is common knowledge today that, Africa cannot ensure sustainable development wit-
hout science, technology and innovation to transform traditional knowledge to competitive
products at the regional and international levels. However, a number of challenges still
need to be addressed to ensure that countries gain the full benefits of science, techno-
logy and innovation.
Much empirical and theoretical work emphasizes that research and development (R&D)
is an important contributor to economic growth. R&D spending is likely to lead to growth
through its positive effect on innovation and total factor productivity (TFP) (Romer, 1990;
Lucas, 1988). As Grossman and Helpman (1994) note, improvements in technology
through industrial innovation have been the driving force behind the inexorably rising stan-
dards of living in the developed world over the long run21
Research targeted at enhancing innovation will allow businesses to gain a competitive ad-
vantage, support sectors to transform, and achieve their digitalization potential. To achieve
this, the strategy will focus on a framework for creating various facilities and programs to
enhance and support the country’s innovative capability to enable them to build new and
innovative products.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Africa has been slow to both adapt to and develop its science and technology sectors
and commercialize its innovations despite multiple agreements for example the decision
by Heads of Governments and States to increase the investment in R&D to at least 1%
of GDP on research and development and the adoption of the Science, Technology and
Innovation Strategy for Africa 2024 (STISA). Although Africa accounts for 13.4 per cent of
the world’s people, it produces only 1.1 per cent of the scientific knowledge. Only 1% of
global investment in R&D is spent in Africa, and the continent holds a tiny 0.1% of the
world’s patents22.
There is need to promote and facilitate scientific R&D work to a level that could have im-
pact on Africa’s capacity to develop, produce, manufacture and assemble Digital products
and services as a step towards developing a local, globally competitive ICT service sector
and industry.
21 The Impact of Research and Development on Economic Growth and Productivity – Pepperdine University
22 https://www.iriweb.org/sites/default/files/2016GlobalR%26DFundingForecast_2.pdf
59
The transition from the conduct of science or research to the application of scientific
knowledge to generate specific product and process innovations will require more than
the establishment of Research and Development institutions and programs. It will also
require the creation and/or use of business or commercial oriented enterprises for innova-
tion. Such institutional arrangements can take different forms such as the development of
technology and innovation cities. Technology and Innovation cities will facilitate the crea-
tion of jobs, establishment of new firms, facilitate the link between universities and these
firms; and encourage high technology development.
The African Union has set a target of 1% of GDP invested on R&D, but data available
show that very few Member States are close to this target:
R&D EXPENDITURE AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP,
LATEST YEAR AVAILABLE
2% and above 1% - < 2% 0,50% - < 1% 0,25% - < 0,50% Less than 0,25% No data
Research and development (R&D) expenditure as a percentage of GDP
Data by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics | 2016
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Build and strengthen cooperation between stakeholders (including governments,
private sector and citizens) on research and development
• Leverage national and international technology transfer processes
• Foster networking between universities and the rest of national innovation sys-
tem and multi-stakeholder’s collaborations to facilitate the transfer of university
research results market
60
• Encourage partnership and collaboration between the education institutions,
training system and the industry to address skills scarcity needs
• Encourage transfer of science and technology innovations, cooperation and net-
working among AU Member States
• Provide a platform for collaborative projects among AU Member States
• Promote policies and strategies that support Open Access (OA) to Scientific
Knowledge access to and the re-use of research to stimulate innovation and
application of knowledge;
• Promote policies and strategies that support cooperation in the use of open
educational resources (OERs) to promote access to educational content.
Improving resource development capacity for research and development
• Improve resource capacity for research and development
• Improve macroeconomic frameworks that promote R&D;
• Redefine the university research agendas of all stakeholders in the innovation
system
• Promote technological innovation within the research community
• Enhance capacities of intermediaries and specialists aiming to support universi-
ty researchers commercialize their research results
• Boost the monitoring and evaluation bodies to assist in the commercial exploi-
tation of university research results
• Establish a system to encourage women and youth in research, technology and
innovation activities
• Invest in Research & Development, with a focus on innovation and start-ups
and encourage governments to co-invest into start-ups to de-risk and leverage
private investment.
• Allocate a portion of national budgets to R&D
• Ensure a percentage of public papers in international journals are published by
African Scholars
• Setting Institutions for digital innovation and research, and development to
ensure effective higher learning and education of scientists, engineers, and
technicians from Africa.
• Encourage/include public operators in strategies aimed at embracing the
emerging technology (block chain, Artificial Intelligence…) through research and
development.
61
X. STRATEGIC ENABLERS
Achieving digital transformation in Africa will require political commitment at the highest
level, aligning of policies and sector regulation and a massive scaling-up of investment and
dedication of resources towards the foundation pillars and critical sectors for digital trans-
formation. It will take leadership and a vision to push the frontiers of innovation, regional
integration and public-private coordination so that the 21st century will be the Africa’s digi-
tal transformation century. The common strategy recognizes the diversity of contexts and
situations for African Union Members States and acknowledges the likelihood of variable
speeds and multiple pathways towards common goals.
A. POLITICAL COMMITMENT
• Build regional and international support for the African Digital Transformation
Strategy
• Align the Strategy with Africa Vision 2063 and the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs)
• Encourage AU Member States and partners to implement the Strategy
effectively.
• Ratification of AU Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection
• Appoint a Champion for Digital Transformation in Africa
• Establish the necessary coordination structures for the digital economy in
member states, RECs and the AU Commission
B. STREGTHEN IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
Central to the implementation of the recommendations and proposed actions of the Digi-
tal Transformation Strategy is a common thread running through the entire document that
calls for the need for regional integration, mutual recognition and harmonization of existing
digitalization initiatives, projects and systems in addition to the promotion of new initia-
tives. We shall therefore use the proposed recommendations and actions of the Digital
Transformation Strategy and its embedded linkages to create an ecosystem of opportu-
nities for every African and establish a Digital Single Market in line with the AfCFTA. The
following are proposed actions to strengthen the implementation framework as strategic
enabler to facilitate the achievement of the objectives of the Digital Transformation Strate-
gy for Africa.
• Develop and adopt an institutional architectural framework for the implementa-
tion of the AU Digital Transformation Strategy
• Establish and strengthen the necessary coordinating structures for the Digital
Economy in Member States, RECs and the AU Commission
62
C. FINANCING AND INVESTMENT
GENERAL OVERVIEW
ICT projects in Africa are being financed by Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and
the Private sector in all stages of project planning, development, preparation and imple-
mentation. Historically, the DFIs have focused on financing large scale ICT projects with
an average size $30m to $200m. Over the past few years DFIs have started financing
small ICT projects in the range of $5m to $10m through equity investment and using Ven-
ture Capital (VC) fund.
During the past 10 years, the private sector has invested in over 450 ICT companies in
Africa which resulted in a total investment of $45bn. Telcos companies were ranked on
top of the list with average project size above $100m.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
The identified digital transformation foundation pillars include digital infrastructure, digital
services, digital entrepreneurs; digital skills and conducive policy/regulatory environment
require significant financial resources to carry out studies, support innovative projects,
capacity building, advisory services for PPP packaging and interventions in policy, stan-
dards and regulations. Africa is still confronted with important bottlenecks and challenges
to establish these key digital foundational pillars.
The development of major national and cross border digital infrastructure networks such
as broadband networks, submarine cable systems, satellites, broadband mobile networks
is financed by DFIs and other major commercial financial institutions through trusted large
companies, mostly Telcos, with strong CAPEX needs. However, myriad of small, early-sta-
ge and risky digital and data services projects undertaken by digital entrepreneurs, with
lack of intermediary financing or supporting mechanisms and many other digital players
with limited financing needs due to their „asset light“ structure such as offshoring compa-
nies face serious financing challenges.
63
There is a need to undertake a match-making of the type of digital operation financial
needs to the available financing opportunity that is suitable for that operation.
On the other hand, the growing private-public partnership space for digital investment
implies that there is a need to focus on leveraging public-private partnerships and the
channeling of public resources through the private sector in order to build digital infrastruc-
ture at national and regional levels and scale up digital services and competitiveness in the
Continent.
Funding for individual countries in Africa remains a challenge, as the private sector, part-
ners and investors consider certain areas as non-viable. Countries are therefore encoura-
ged to collaborate under the regional economic communities to submit funding proposal
for digital infrastructure roll-out and innovation support
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS
Support financing of ICT projects at the national and regional levels through:
• Leveraging private investment and PPPs in ICT interventions
• Use of blended finance to crowd in private capital for digital infrastructure
• Use of senior and subordinated loans, equity participations and guarantees to
promote digital infrastructure and digital services
• Use of bilateral Trust Funds to meet requests from all African Countries to sup-
port innovative projects in digital infrastructure and digital services
• Establishing a dedicated ICT Trust Fund to complement response to pre-invest-
ment studies for regional ICT projects, by financing key activities of the strategy
• Providing seed funds to kick-start ICT small scale projects such as digital health,
digital education, digital agriculture, etc. on the continent using bilateral funds
and support local ICT innovation.
• The use of the Africa Investment Forum platform to advance projects to bank-
able stages.
• Mobilize financial resources by strengthening regional cooperation and multi
stakeholder partnerships and promotion of public and private partnerships
• Create incentives for foreign investments
• Encourage RECs to maximize on economies of scale in submitting funding
proposal and calling for investment
• Promote the development of domestic finance by providing support to local
entrepreneurs and investors
• Develop innovative approaches for the creation and management of universal
access/service funds.
• Develop dedicated funding mechanisms for digital transformation
64
D. PRIVATE SECTOR & CIVIL SOCIETY ENGAGEMENT
We recognise that direct linkages are necessary between public sector, private sector and
civil society to realize the objectives of the Digital Transformation Strategy may not suc-
ceed. While the public sector must retain leadership, accountability and oversight capabi-
lities for the Digital Transformation Strategy, the role of the private sector is in the imple-
mentation of the strategy is important. The involvement of civil society in monitoring the
way these systems are utilized is also needed and hence the following proposed action;
• Promote public private partnerships and other multi-stakeholders partnerships.
E. REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
• Enhance continental and regional cooperation to implement the Strategy
• Facilitate and support the establishment of regional communication networks
• Harmonize legislation at continental and regional levels towards a Digital Single
Market (DSM)
• Collaborate with development partners to implement the Strategy
• Leverage synergies with existing regional and international initiatives with
shared goals.
F. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
• Build capacity among officials on digital development.
• Promote the uptake and usage of digital tools.
• Strengthen cross-border and regional co-operation on digital infrastructure.
• Provide training for citizens and communities.
G. ADVOCACY AND AWARENESS
• Strengthen awareness and advocacy among targeted groups.
• Provide communication, education and awareness programs for leaders,
decision-makers, local communities, and civil society.
• Increase awareness, mobilization, coordination and efficiency on regional,
continental and international initiatives on digitalization
• Establish and implement demand creation programs for Broadband and
ICT Adoption
H. MONITORING AND EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
• Develop a monitoring, evaluation and reporting framework, with appropriate
indicators and tools for tracking the performance and impact of this strategy
• Encourage Member States to conduct digital transformation readiness
assessments
65
Bureau of the Chairperson
African Union Headquaters
P.O. Box 3243, Roosevelt Street
W21K19, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Tel: +251 (0) 11 551 77 00
Fax: +251 (0) 11 551 78 44
www.au.int